Mortimer. These promises are fair, the parties sure, 
And our induction full of prosperous hope.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Lord Mortimer, and cousin Glendower, 1545
Will you sit down? 
And uncle Worcester: a plague upon it! 
I have forgot the map.
Glendower. No, here it is. 
Sit, cousin Percy; sit, good cousin Hotspur, 1550
For by that name as oft as Lancaster 
Doth speak of you, his cheek looks pale and with 
A rising sigh he wisheth you in heaven.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). And you in hell, as oft as he hears Owen Glendower spoke of.
Glendower. I cannot blame him: at my nativity 1555
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes, 
Of burning cressets; and at my birth 
The frame and huge foundation of the earth 
Shaked like a coward.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Why, so it would have done at the same season, if 1560
your mother's cat had but kittened, though yourself 
had never been born.
Glendower. I say the earth did shake when I was born.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). And I say the earth was not of my mind, 
If you suppose as fearing you it shook. 1565
Glendower. The heavens were all on fire, the earth did tremble.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). O, then the earth shook to see the heavens on fire, 
And not in fear of your nativity. 
Diseased nature oftentimes breaks forth 
In strange eruptions; oft the teeming earth 1570
Is with a kind of colic pinch'd and vex'd 
By the imprisoning of unruly wind 
Within her womb; which, for enlargement striving, 
Shakes the old beldam earth and topples down 
Steeples and moss-grown towers. At your birth 1575
Our grandam earth, having this distemperature, 
In passion shook.
Glendower. Cousin, of many men 
I do not bear these crossings. Give me leave 
To tell you once again that at my birth 1580
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes, 
The goats ran from the mountains, and the herds 
Were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields. 
These signs have mark'd me extraordinary; 
And all the courses of my life do show 1585
I am not in the roll of common men. 
Where is he living, clipp'd in with the sea 
That chides the banks of England, Scotland, Wales, 
Which calls me pupil, or hath read to me? 
And bring him out that is but woman's son 1590
Can trace me in the tedious ways of art 
And hold me pace in deep experiments.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). I think there's no man speaks better Welsh. 
I'll to dinner.
Mortimer. Peace, cousin Percy; you will make him mad. 1595
Glendower. I can call spirits from the vasty deep.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Why, so can I, or so can any man; 
But will they come when you do call for them?
Glendower. Why, I can teach you, cousin, to command 
The devil. 1600
Hotspur (Henry Percy). And I can teach thee, coz, to shame the devil 
By telling truth: tell truth and shame the devil. 
If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither, 
And I'll be sworn I have power to shame him hence. 
O, while you live, tell truth and shame the devil! 1605
Mortimer. Come, come, no more of this unprofitable chat.
Glendower. Three times hath Henry Bolingbroke made head 
Against my power; thrice from the banks of Wye 
And sandy-bottom'd Severn have I sent him 
Bootless home and weather-beaten back. 1610
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Home without boots, and in foul weather too! 
How 'scapes he agues, in the devil's name?
Glendower. Come, here's the map: shall we divide our right 
According to our threefold order ta'en?
Mortimer. The archdeacon hath divided it 1615
Into three limits very equally: 
England, from Trent and Severn hitherto, 
By south and east is to my part assign'd: 
All westward, Wales beyond the Severn shore, 
And all the fertile land within that bound, 1620
To Owen Glendower: and, dear coz, to you 
The remnant northward, lying off from Trent. 
And our indentures tripartite are drawn; 
Which being sealed interchangeably, 
A business that this night may execute, 1625
To-morrow, cousin Percy, you and I 
And my good Lord of Worcester will set forth 
To meet your father and the Scottish power, 
As is appointed us, at Shrewsbury. 
My father Glendower is not ready yet, 1630
Not shall we need his help these fourteen days. 
Within that space you may have drawn together 
Your tenants, friends and neighbouring gentlemen.
Glendower. A shorter time shall send me to you, lords: 
And in my conduct shall your ladies come; 1635
From whom you now must steal and take no leave, 
For there will be a world of water shed 
Upon the parting of your wives and you.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Methinks my moiety, north from Burton here, 
In quantity equals not one of yours: 1640
See how this river comes me cranking in, 
And cuts me from the best of all my land 
A huge half-moon, a monstrous cantle out. 
I'll have the current in this place damm'd up; 
And here the smug and silver Trent shall run 1645
In a new channel, fair and evenly; 
It shall not wind with such a deep indent, 
To rob me of so rich a bottom here.
Glendower. Not wind? it shall, it must; you see it doth.
Mortimer. Yea, but 1650
Mark how he bears his course, and runs me up 
With like advantage on the other side; 
Gelding the opposed continent as much 
As on the other side it takes from you.
Earl of Worcester. Yea, but a little charge will trench him here 1655
And on this north side win this cape of land; 
And then he runs straight and even.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). I'll have it so: a little charge will do it.
Glendower. I'll not have it alter'd.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Will not you? 1660
Glendower. No, nor you shall not.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Who shall say me nay?
Glendower. Why, that will I.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Let me not understand you, then; speak it in Welsh.
Glendower. I can speak English, lord, as well as you; 1665
For I was train'd up in the English court; 
Where, being but young, I framed to the harp 
Many an English ditty lovely well 
And gave the tongue a helpful ornament, 
A virtue that was never seen in you. 1670
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Marry, 
And I am glad of it with all my heart: 
I had rather be a kitten and cry mew 
Than one of these same metre ballad-mongers; 
I had rather hear a brazen canstick turn'd, 1675
Or a dry wheel grate on the axle-tree; 
And that would set my teeth nothing on edge, 
Nothing so much as mincing poetry: 
'Tis like the forced gait of a shuffling nag.
Glendower. Come, you shall have Trent turn'd. 1680
Hotspur (Henry Percy). I do not care: I'll give thrice so much land 
To any well-deserving friend; 
But in the way of bargain, mark ye me, 
I'll cavil on the ninth part of a hair. 
Are the indentures drawn? shall we be gone? 1685
Glendower. The moon shines fair; you may away by night: 
I'll haste the writer and withal 
Break with your wives of your departure hence: 
I am afraid my daughter will run mad, 
So much she doteth on her Mortimer. 1690
[Exit GLENDOWER]

Mortimer. Fie, cousin Percy! how you cross my father!
Hotspur (Henry Percy). I cannot choose: sometime he angers me 
With telling me of the mouldwarp and the ant, 
Of the dreamer Merlin and his prophecies, 1695
And of a dragon and a finless fish, 
A clip-wing'd griffin and a moulten raven, 
A couching lion and a ramping cat, 
And such a deal of skimble-skamble stuff 
As puts me from my faith. I tell you what; 1700
He held me last night at least nine hours 
In reckoning up the several devils' names 
That were his lackeys: I cried 'hum,' and 'well, go to,' 
But mark'd him not a word. O, he is as tedious 
As a tired horse, a railing wife; 1705
Worse than a smoky house: I had rather live 
With cheese and garlic in a windmill, far, 
Than feed on cates and have him talk to me 
In any summer-house in Christendom.
Mortimer. In faith, he is a worthy gentleman, 1710
Exceedingly well read, and profited 
In strange concealments, valiant as a lion 
And as wondrous affable and as bountiful 
As mines of India. Shall I tell you, cousin? 
He holds your temper in a high respect 1715
And curbs himself even of his natural scope 
When you come 'cross his humour; faith, he does: 
I warrant you, that man is not alive 
Might so have tempted him as you have done, 
Without the taste of danger and reproof: 1720
But do not use it oft, let me entreat you.
Earl of Worcester. In faith, my lord, you are too wilful-blame; 
And since your coming hither have done enough 
To put him quite beside his patience. 
You must needs learn, lord, to amend this fault: 1725
Though sometimes it show greatness, courage, blood,— 
And that's the dearest grace it renders you,— 
Yet oftentimes it doth present harsh rage, 
Defect of manners, want of government, 
Pride, haughtiness, opinion and disdain: 1730
The least of which haunting a nobleman 
Loseth men's hearts and leaves behind a stain 
Upon the beauty of all parts besides, 
Beguiling them of commendation.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Well, I am school'd: good manners be your speed! 1735
Here come our wives, and let us take our leave.
[Re-enter GLENDOWER with the ladies]

Mortimer. This is the deadly spite that angers me; 
My wife can speak no English, I no Welsh.
Glendower. My daughter weeps: she will not part with you; 1740
She'll be a soldier too, she'll to the wars.
Mortimer. Good father, tell her that she and my aunt Percy 
Shall follow in your conduct speedily.
[Glendower speaks to her in Welsh, and she answers him in the same]

Glendower. She is desperate here; a peevish self-wind harlotry, 1745
one that no persuasion can do good upon.
[The lady speaks in Welsh]

Mortimer. I understand thy looks: that pretty Welsh 
Which thou pour'st down from these swelling heavens 
I am too perfect in; and, but for shame, 1750
In such a parley should I answer thee. 
[The lady speaks again in Welsh] 
I understand thy kisses and thou mine, 
And that's a feeling disputation: 
But I will never be a truant, love, 1755
Till I have learned thy language; for thy tongue 
Makes Welsh as sweet as ditties highly penn'd, 
Sung by a fair queen in a summer's bower, 
With ravishing division, to her lute.
Glendower. Nay, if you melt, then will she run mad. 1760
[The lady speaks again in Welsh]

Mortimer. O, I am ignorance itself in this!
Glendower. She bids you on the wanton rushes lay you down 
And rest your gentle head upon her lap, 
And she will sing the song that pleaseth you 1765
And on your eyelids crown the god of sleep. 
Charming your blood with pleasing heaviness, 
Making such difference 'twixt wake and sleep 
As is the difference betwixt day and night 
The hour before the heavenly-harness'd team 1770
Begins his golden progress in the east.
Mortimer. With all my heart I'll sit and hear her sing: 
By that time will our book, I think, be drawn
Glendower. Do so; 
And those musicians that shall play to you 1775
Hang in the air a thousand leagues from hence, 
And straight they shall be here: sit, and attend.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Come, Kate, thou art perfect in lying down: come, 
quick, quick, that I may lay my head in thy lap.
Lady Percy. Go, ye giddy goose. 1780
[The music plays]

Hotspur (Henry Percy). Now I perceive the devil understands Welsh; 
And 'tis no marvel he is so humorous. 
By'r lady, he is a good musician.
Lady Percy. Then should you be nothing but musical for you are 1785
altogether governed by humours. Lie still, ye thief, 
and hear the lady sing in Welsh.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). I had rather hear Lady, my brach, howl in Irish.
Lady Percy. Wouldst thou have thy head broken?
Hotspur (Henry Percy). No. 1790
Lady Percy. Then be still.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Neither;'tis a woman's fault.
Lady Percy. Now God help thee!
Hotspur (Henry Percy). To the Welsh lady's bed.
Lady Percy. What's that? 1795
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Peace! she sings.
[Here the lady sings a Welsh song]

Hotspur (Henry Percy). Come, Kate, I'll have your song too.
Lady Percy. Not mine, in good sooth.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Not yours, in good sooth! Heart! you swear like a 1800
comfit-maker's wife. 'Not you, in good sooth,' and 
'as true as I live,' and 'as God shall mend me,' and 
'as sure as day,' 
And givest such sarcenet surety for thy oaths, 
As if thou never walk'st further than Finsbury. 1805
Swear me, Kate, like a lady as thou art, 
A good mouth-filling oath, and leave 'in sooth,' 
And such protest of pepper-gingerbread, 
To velvet-guards and Sunday-citizens. 
Come, sing. 1810
Lady Percy. I will not sing.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). 'Tis the next way to turn tailor, or be red-breast 
teacher. An the indentures be drawn, I'll away 
within these two hours; and so, come in when ye will.
[Exit]

Glendower. Come, come, Lord Mortimer; you are as slow 
As hot Lord Percy is on fire to go. 
By this our book is drawn; we'll but seal, 
And then to horse immediately.
Mortimer. With all my heart. 1820
[Exeunt]

 ---
 . previous scene	     	
Act III, Scene 2

London. The palace.

     	next scene  .
---
[Enter KING HENRY IV, PRINCE HENRY, and others]

Henry IV. Lords, give us leave; the Prince of Wales and I 
Must have some private conference; but be near at hand, 
For we shall presently have need of you. 1825
[Exeunt Lords] 
I know not whether God will have it so, 
For some displeasing service I have done, 
That, in his secret doom, out of my blood 
He'll breed revengement and a scourge for me; 1830
But thou dost in thy passages of life 
Make me believe that thou art only mark'd 
For the hot vengeance and the rod of heaven 
To punish my mistreadings. Tell me else, 
Could such inordinate and low desires, 1835
Such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean attempts, 
Such barren pleasures, rude society, 
As thou art match'd withal and grafted to, 
Accompany the greatness of thy blood 
And hold their level with thy princely heart? 1840
Henry V. So please your majesty, I would I could 
Quit all offences with as clear excuse 
As well as I am doubtless I can purge 
Myself of many I am charged withal: 
Yet such extenuation let me beg, 1845
As, in reproof of many tales devised, 
which oft the ear of greatness needs must hear, 
By smiling pick-thanks and base news-mongers, 
I may, for some things true, wherein my youth 
Hath faulty wander'd and irregular, 1850
Find pardon on my true submission.
Henry IV. God pardon thee! yet let me wonder, Harry, 
At thy affections, which do hold a wing 
Quite from the flight of all thy ancestors. 
Thy place in council thou hast rudely lost. 1855
Which by thy younger brother is supplied, 
And art almost an alien to the hearts 
Of all the court and princes of my blood: 
The hope and expectation of thy time 
Is ruin'd, and the soul of every man 1860
Prophetically doth forethink thy fall. 
Had I so lavish of my presence been, 
So common-hackney'd in the eyes of men, 
So stale and cheap to vulgar company, 
Opinion, that did help me to the crown, 1865
Had still kept loyal to possession 
And left me in reputeless banishment, 
A fellow of no mark nor likelihood. 
By being seldom seen, I could not stir 
But like a comet I was wonder'd at; 1870
That men would tell their children 'This is he;' 
Others would say 'Where, which is Bolingbroke?' 
And then I stole all courtesy from heaven, 
And dress'd myself in such humility 
That I did pluck allegiance from men's hearts, 1875
Loud shouts and salutations from their mouths, 
Even in the presence of the crowned king. 
Thus did I keep my person fresh and new; 
My presence, like a robe pontifical, 
Ne'er seen but wonder'd at: and so my state, 1880
Seldom but sumptuous, showed like a feast 
And won by rareness such solemnity. 
The skipping king, he ambled up and down 
With shallow jesters and rash bavin wits, 
Soon kindled and soon burnt; carded his state, 1885
Mingled his royalty with capering fools, 
Had his great name profaned with their scorns 
And gave his countenance, against his name, 
To laugh at gibing boys and stand the push 
Of every beardless vain comparative, 1890
Grew a companion to the common streets, 
Enfeoff'd himself to popularity; 
That, being daily swallow'd by men's eyes, 
They surfeited with honey and began 
To loathe the taste of sweetness, whereof a little 1895
More than a little is by much too much. 
So when he had occasion to be seen, 
He was but as the cuckoo is in June, 
Heard, not regarded; seen, but with such eyes 
As, sick and blunted with community, 1900
Afford no extraordinary gaze, 
Such as is bent on sun-like majesty 
When it shines seldom in admiring eyes; 
But rather drowzed and hung their eyelids down, 
Slept in his face and render'd such aspect 1905
As cloudy men use to their adversaries, 
Being with his presence glutted, gorged and full. 
And in that very line, Harry, standest thou; 
For thou has lost thy princely privilege 
With vile participation: not an eye 1910
But is a-weary of thy common sight, 
Save mine, which hath desired to see thee more; 
Which now doth that I would not have it do, 
Make blind itself with foolish tenderness.
Henry V. I shall hereafter, my thrice gracious lord, 1915
Be more myself.
Henry IV. For all the world 
As thou art to this hour was Richard then 
When I from France set foot at Ravenspurgh, 
And even as I was then is Percy now. 1920
Now, by my sceptre and my soul to boot, 
He hath more worthy interest to the state 
Than thou the shadow of succession; 
For of no right, nor colour like to right, 
He doth fill fields with harness in the realm, 1925
Turns head against the lion's armed jaws, 
And, being no more in debt to years than thou, 
Leads ancient lords and reverend bishops on 
To bloody battles and to bruising arms. 
What never-dying honour hath he got 1930
Against renowned Douglas! whose high deeds, 
Whose hot incursions and great name in arms 
Holds from all soldiers chief majority 
And military title capital 
Through all the kingdoms that acknowledge Christ: 1935
Thrice hath this Hotspur, Mars in swathling clothes, 
This infant warrior, in his enterprises 
Discomfited great Douglas, ta'en him once, 
Enlarged him and made a friend of him, 
To fill the mouth of deep defiance up 1940
And shake the peace and safety of our throne. 
And what say you to this? Percy, Northumberland, 
The Archbishop's grace of York, Douglas, Mortimer, 
Capitulate against us and are up. 
But wherefore do I tell these news to thee? 1945
Why, Harry, do I tell thee of my foes, 
Which art my near'st and dearest enemy? 
Thou that art like enough, through vassal fear, 
Base inclination and the start of spleen 
To fight against me under Percy's pay, 1950
To dog his heels and curtsy at his frowns, 
To show how much thou art degenerate.
Henry V. Do not think so; you shall not find it so: 
And God forgive them that so much have sway'd 
Your majesty's good thoughts away from me! 1955
I will redeem all this on Percy's head 
And in the closing of some glorious day 
Be bold to tell you that I am your son; 
When I will wear a garment all of blood 
And stain my favours in a bloody mask, 1960
Which, wash'd away, shall scour my shame with it: 
And that shall be the day, whene'er it lights, 
That this same child of honour and renown, 
This gallant Hotspur, this all-praised knight, 
And your unthought-of Harry chance to meet. 1965
For every honour sitting on his helm, 
Would they were multitudes, and on my head 
My shames redoubled! for the time will come, 
That I shall make this northern youth exchange 
His glorious deeds for my indignities. 1970
Percy is but my factor, good my lord, 
To engross up glorious deeds on my behalf; 
And I will call him to so strict account, 
That he shall render every glory up, 
Yea, even the slightest worship of his time, 1975
Or I will tear the reckoning from his heart. 
This, in the name of God, I promise here: 
The which if He be pleased I shall perform, 
I do beseech your majesty may salve 
The long-grown wounds of my intemperance: 1980
If not, the end of life cancels all bands; 
And I will die a hundred thousand deaths 
Ere break the smallest parcel of this vow.
Henry IV. A hundred thousand rebels die in this: 
Thou shalt have charge and sovereign trust herein. 1985
[Enter BLUNT] 
How now, good Blunt? thy looks are full of speed.
Blunt. So hath the business that I come to speak of. 
Lord Mortimer of Scotland hath sent word 
That Douglas and the English rebels met 1990
The eleventh of this month at Shrewsbury 
A mighty and a fearful head they are, 
If promises be kept on every hand, 
As ever offer'd foul play in the state.
Henry IV. The Earl of Westmoreland set forth to-day; 1995
With him my son, Lord John of Lancaster; 
For this advertisement is five days old: 
On Wednesday next, Harry, you shall set forward; 
On Thursday we ourselves will march: our meeting 
Is Bridgenorth: and, Harry, you shall march 2000
Through Gloucestershire; by which account, 
Our business valued, some twelve days hence 
Our general forces at Bridgenorth shall meet. 
Our hands are full of business: let's away; 
Advantage feeds him fat, while men delay. 2005
[Exeunt]

 ---
 . previous scene	     	
Act III, Scene 3

Eastcheap. The Boar’s-Head Tavern.

     	 
---
[Enter FALSTAFF and BARDOLPH]

Falstaff. Bardolph, am I not fallen away vilely since this last 
action? do I not bate? do I not dwindle? Why my 
skin hangs about me like an like an old lady's loose 2010
gown; I am withered like an old apple-john. Well, 
I'll repent, and that suddenly, while I am in some 
liking; I shall be out of heart shortly, and then I 
shall have no strength to repent. An I have not 
forgotten what the inside of a church is made of, I 2015
am a peppercorn, a brewer's horse: the inside of a 
church! Company, villanous company, hath been the 
spoil of me.
Lord Bardolph. Sir John, you are so fretful, you cannot live long.
Falstaff. Why, there is it: come sing me a bawdy song; make 2020
me merry. I was as virtuously given as a gentleman 
need to be; virtuous enough; swore little; diced not 
above seven times a week; went to a bawdy-house once 
in a quarter—of an hour; paid money that I 
borrowed, three of four times; lived well and in 2025
good compass: and now I live out of all order, out 
of all compass.
Lord Bardolph. Why, you are so fat, Sir John, that you must needs 
be out of all compass, out of all reasonable 
compass, Sir John. 2030
Falstaff. Do thou amend thy face, and I'll amend my life: 
thou art our admiral, thou bearest the lantern in 
the poop, but 'tis in the nose of thee; thou art the 
Knight of the Burning Lamp.
Lord Bardolph. Why, Sir John, my face does you no harm. 2035
Falstaff. No, I'll be sworn; I make as good use of it as many 
a man doth of a Death's-head or a memento mori: I 
never see thy face but I think upon hell-fire and 
Dives that lived in purple; for there he is in his 
robes, burning, burning. If thou wert any way 2040
given to virtue, I would swear by thy face; my oath 
should be 'By this fire, that's God's angel:' but 
thou art altogether given over; and wert indeed, but 
for the light in thy face, the son of utter 
darkness. When thou rannest up Gadshill in the 2045
night to catch my horse, if I did not think thou 
hadst been an ignis fatuus or a ball of wildfire, 
there's no purchase in money. O, thou art a 
perpetual triumph, an everlasting bonfire-light! 
Thou hast saved me a thousand marks in links and 2050
torches, walking with thee in the night betwixt 
tavern and tavern: but the sack that thou hast 
drunk me would have bought me lights as good cheap 
at the dearest chandler's in Europe. I have 
maintained that salamander of yours with fire any 2055
time this two and thirty years; God reward me for 
it!
Lord Bardolph. 'Sblood, I would my face were in your belly!
Falstaff. God-a-mercy! so should I be sure to be heart-burned. 
[Enter Hostess] 2060
How now, Dame Partlet the hen! have you inquired 
yet who picked my pocket?
Hostess Quickly. Why, Sir John, what do you think, Sir John? do you 
think I keep thieves in my house? I have searched, 
I have inquired, so has my husband, man by man, boy 2065
by boy, servant by servant: the tithe of a hair 
was never lost in my house before.
Falstaff. Ye lie, hostess: Bardolph was shaved and lost many 
a hair; and I'll be sworn my pocket was picked. Go 
to, you are a woman, go. 2070
Hostess Quickly. Who, I? no; I defy thee: God's light, I was never 
called so in mine own house before.
Falstaff. Go to, I know you well enough.
Hostess Quickly. No, Sir John; You do not know me, Sir John. I know 
you, Sir John: you owe me money, Sir John; and now 2075
you pick a quarrel to beguile me of it: I bought 
you a dozen of shirts to your back.
Falstaff. Dowlas, filthy dowlas: I have given them away to 
bakers' wives, and they have made bolters of them.
Hostess Quickly. Now, as I am a true woman, holland of eight 2080
shillings an ell. You owe money here besides, Sir 
John, for your diet and by-drinkings, and money lent 
you, four and twenty pound.
Falstaff. He had his part of it; let him pay.
Hostess Quickly. He? alas, he is poor; he hath nothing. 2085
Falstaff. How! poor? look upon his face; what call you rich? 
let them coin his nose, let them coin his cheeks: 
Ill not pay a denier. What, will you make a younker 
of me? shall I not take mine case in mine inn but I 
shall have my pocket picked? I have lost a 2090
seal-ring of my grandfather's worth forty mark.
Hostess Quickly. O Jesu, I have heard the prince tell him, I know not 
how oft, that ring was copper!
Falstaff. How! the prince is a Jack, a sneak-cup: 'sblood, an 
he were here, I would cudgel him like a dog, if he 2095
would say so. 
[Enter PRINCE HENRY and PETO, marching, and FALSTAFF 
meets them playing on his truncheon like a life] 
How now, lad! is the wind in that door, i' faith? 
must we all march? 2100
Lord Bardolph. Yea, two and two, Newgate fashion.
Hostess Quickly. My lord, I pray you, hear me.
Henry V. What sayest thou, Mistress Quickly? How doth thy 
husband? I love him well; he is an honest man.
Hostess Quickly. Good my lord, hear me. 2105
Falstaff. Prithee, let her alone, and list to me.
Henry V. What sayest thou, Jack?
Falstaff. The other night I fell asleep here behind the arras 
and had my pocket picked: this house is turned 
bawdy-house; they pick pockets. 2110
Henry V. What didst thou lose, Jack?
Falstaff. Wilt thou believe me, Hal? three or four bonds of 
forty pound apiece, and a seal-ring of my 
grandfather's.
Henry V. A trifle, some eight-penny matter. 2115
Hostess Quickly. So I told him, my lord; and I said I heard your 
grace say so: and, my lord, he speaks most vilely 
of you, like a foul-mouthed man as he is; and said 
he would cudgel you.
Henry V. What! he did not? 2120
Hostess Quickly. There's neither faith, truth, nor womanhood in me else.
Falstaff. There's no more faith in thee than in a stewed 
prune; nor no more truth in thee than in a drawn 
fox; and for womanhood, Maid Marian may be the 
deputy's wife of the ward to thee. Go, you thing, 2125
go
Hostess Quickly. Say, what thing? what thing?
Falstaff. What thing! why, a thing to thank God on.
Hostess Quickly. I am no thing to thank God on, I would thou 
shouldst know it; I am an honest man's wife: and, 2130
setting thy knighthood aside, thou art a knave to 
call me so.
Falstaff. Setting thy womanhood aside, thou art a beast to say 
otherwise.
Hostess Quickly. Say, what beast, thou knave, thou? 2135
Falstaff. What beast! why, an otter.
Henry V. An otter, Sir John! Why an otter?
Falstaff. Why, she's neither fish nor flesh; a man knows not 
where to have her.
Hostess Quickly. Thou art an unjust man in saying so: thou or any 2140
man knows where to have me, thou knave, thou!
Henry V. Thou sayest true, hostess; and he slanders thee most grossly.
Hostess Quickly. So he doth you, my lord; and said this other day you 
ought him a thousand pound.
Henry V. Sirrah, do I owe you a thousand pound? 2145
Falstaff. A thousand pound, Ha! a million: thy love is worth 
a million: thou owest me thy love.
Hostess Quickly. Nay, my lord, he called you Jack, and said he would 
cudgel you.
Falstaff. Did I, Bardolph? 2150
Lord Bardolph. Indeed, Sir John, you said so.
Falstaff. Yea, if he said my ring was copper.
Henry V. I say 'tis copper: darest thou be as good as thy word now?
Falstaff. Why, Hal, thou knowest, as thou art but man, I dare: 
but as thou art prince, I fear thee as I fear the 2155
roaring of a lion's whelp.
Henry V. And why not as the lion?
Falstaff. The king is to be feared as the lion: dost thou 
think I'll fear thee as I fear thy father? nay, an 
I do, I pray God my girdle break. 2160
Henry V. O, if it should, how would thy guts fall about thy 
knees! But, sirrah, there's no room for faith, 
truth, nor honesty in this bosom of thine; it is all 
filled up with guts and midriff. Charge an honest 
woman with picking thy pocket! why, thou whoreson, 2165
impudent, embossed rascal, if there were anything in 
thy pocket but tavern-reckonings, memorandums of 
bawdy-houses, and one poor penny-worth of 
sugar-candy to make thee long-winded, if thy pocket 
were enriched with any other injuries but these, I 2170
am a villain: and yet you will stand to if; you will 
not pocket up wrong: art thou not ashamed?
Falstaff. Dost thou hear, Hal? thou knowest in the state of 
innocency Adam fell; and what should poor Jack 
Falstaff do in the days of villany? Thou seest I 2175
have more flesh than another man, and therefore more 
frailty. You confess then, you picked my pocket?
Henry V. It appears so by the story.
Falstaff. Hostess, I forgive thee: go, make ready breakfast; 
love thy husband, look to thy servants, cherish thy 2180
guests: thou shalt find me tractable to any honest 
reason: thou seest I am pacified still. Nay, 
prithee, be gone. 
[Exit Hostess] 
Now Hal, to the news at court: for the robbery, 2185
lad, how is that answered?
Henry V. O, my sweet beef, I must still be good angel to 
thee: the money is paid back again.
Falstaff. O, I do not like that paying back; 'tis a double labour.
Henry V. I am good friends with my father and may do any thing. 2190
Falstaff. Rob me the exchequer the first thing thou doest, and 
do it with unwashed hands too.
Lord Bardolph. Do, my lord.
Henry V. I have procured thee, Jack, a charge of foot.
Falstaff. I would it had been of horse. Where shall I find 2195
one that can steal well? O for a fine thief, of the 
age of two and twenty or thereabouts! I am 
heinously unprovided. Well, God be thanked for 
these rebels, they offend none but the virtuous: I 
laud them, I praise them. 2200
Henry V. Bardolph!
Lord Bardolph. My lord?
Henry V. Go bear this letter to Lord John of Lancaster, to my 
brother John; this to my Lord of Westmoreland. 
[Exit Bardolph] 2205
Go, Peto, to horse, to horse; for thou and I have 
thirty miles to ride yet ere dinner time. 
[Exit Peto] 
Jack, meet me to-morrow in the temple hall at two 
o'clock in the afternoon. 2210
There shalt thou know thy charge; and there receive 
Money and order for their furniture. 
The land is burning; Percy stands on high; 
And either we or they must lower lie.
[Exit PRINCE HENRY]

Falstaff. Rare words! brave world! Hostess, my breakfast, come! 
O, I could wish this tavern were my drum!
[Exit]
[Enter HOTSPUR, WORCESTER, and DOUGLAS]

Hotspur (Henry Percy). Well said, my noble Scot: if speaking truth 2220
In this fine age were not thought flattery, 
Such attribution should the Douglas have, 
As not a soldier of this season's stamp 
Should go so general current through the world. 
By God, I cannot flatter; I do defy 2225
The tongues of soothers; but a braver place 
In my heart's love hath no man than yourself: 
Nay, task me to my word; approve me, lord.
Earl of Douglas. Thou art the king of honour: 
No man so potent breathes upon the ground 2230
But I will beard him.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Do so, and 'tis well. 
[Enter a Messenger with letters] 
What letters hast thou there?—I can but thank you.
Messenger. These letters come from your father. 2235
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Letters from him! why comes he not himself?
Messenger. He cannot come, my lord; he is grievous sick.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). 'Zounds! how has he the leisure to be sick 
In such a rustling time? Who leads his power? 
Under whose government come they along? 2240
Messenger. His letters bear his mind, not I, my lord.
Earl of Worcester. I prithee, tell me, doth he keep his bed?
Messenger. He did, my lord, four days ere I set forth; 
And at the time of my departure thence 
He was much fear'd by his physicians. 2245
Earl of Worcester. I would the state of time had first been whole 
Ere he by sickness had been visited: 
His health was never better worth than now.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Sick now! droop now! this sickness doth infect 
The very life-blood of our enterprise; 2250
'Tis catching hither, even to our camp. 
He writes me here, that inward sickness— 
And that his friends by deputation could not 
So soon be drawn, nor did he think it meet 
To lay so dangerous and dear a trust 2255
On any soul removed but on his own. 
Yet doth he give us bold advertisement, 
That with our small conjunction we should on, 
To see how fortune is disposed to us; 
For, as he writes, there is no quailing now. 2260
Because the king is certainly possess'd 
Of all our purposes. What say you to it?
Earl of Worcester. Your father's sickness is a maim to us.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). A perilous gash, a very limb lopp'd off: 
And yet, in faith, it is not; his present want 2265
Seems more than we shall find it: were it good 
To set the exact wealth of all our states 
All at one cast? to set so rich a main 
On the nice hazard of one doubtful hour? 
It were not good; for therein should we read 2270
The very bottom and the soul of hope, 
The very list, the very utmost bound 
Of all our fortunes.
Earl of Douglas. 'Faith, and so we should; 
Where now remains a sweet reversion: 2275
We may boldly spend upon the hope of what 
Is to come in: 
A comfort of retirement lives in this.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). A rendezvous, a home to fly unto. 
If that the devil and mischance look big 2280
Upon the maidenhead of our affairs.
Earl of Worcester. But yet I would your father had been here. 
The quality and hair of our attempt 
Brooks no division: it will be thought 
By some, that know not why he is away, 2285
That wisdom, loyalty and mere dislike 
Of our proceedings kept the earl from hence: 
And think how such an apprehension 
May turn the tide of fearful faction 
And breed a kind of question in our cause; 2290
For well you know we of the offering side 
Must keep aloof from strict arbitrement, 
And stop all sight-holes, every loop from whence 
The eye of reason may pry in upon us: 
This absence of your father's draws a curtain, 2295
That shows the ignorant a kind of fear 
Before not dreamt of.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). You strain too far. 
I rather of his absence make this use: 
It lends a lustre and more great opinion, 2300
A larger dare to our great enterprise, 
Than if the earl were here; for men must think, 
If we without his help can make a head 
To push against a kingdom, with his help 
We shall o'erturn it topsy-turvy down. 2305
Yet all goes well, yet all our joints are whole.
Earl of Douglas. As heart can think: there is not such a word 
Spoke of in Scotland as this term of fear.
[Enter SIR RICHARD VERNON]

Hotspur (Henry Percy). My cousin Vernon, welcome, by my soul. 2310
Vernon. Pray God my news be worth a welcome, lord. 
The Earl of Westmoreland, seven thousand strong, 
Is marching hitherwards; with him Prince John.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). No harm: what more?
Vernon. And further, I have learn'd, 2315
The king himself in person is set forth, 
Or hitherwards intended speedily, 
With strong and mighty preparation.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). He shall be welcome too. Where is his son, 
The nimble-footed madcap Prince of Wales, 2320
And his comrades, that daff'd the world aside, 
And bid it pass?
Vernon. All furnish'd, all in arms; 
All plumed like estridges that with the wind 
Baited like eagles having lately bathed; 2325
Glittering in golden coats, like images; 
As full of spirit as the month of May, 
And gorgeous as the sun at midsummer; 
Wanton as youthful goats, wild as young bulls. 
I saw young Harry, with his beaver on, 2330
His cuisses on his thighs, gallantly arm'd 
Rise from the ground like feather'd Mercury, 
And vaulted with such ease into his seat, 
As if an angel dropp'd down from the clouds, 
To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus 2335
And witch the world with noble horsemanship.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). No more, no more: worse than the sun in March, 
This praise doth nourish agues. Let them come: 
They come like sacrifices in their trim, 
And to the fire-eyed maid of smoky war 2340
All hot and bleeding will we offer them: 
The mailed Mars shall on his altar sit 
Up to the ears in blood. I am on fire 
To hear this rich reprisal is so nigh 
And yet not ours. Come, let me taste my horse, 2345
Who is to bear me like a thunderbolt 
Against the bosom of the Prince of Wales: 
Harry to Harry shall, hot horse to horse, 
Meet and ne'er part till one drop down a corse. 
O that Glendower were come! 2350
Vernon. There is more news: 
I learn'd in Worcester, as I rode along, 
He cannot draw his power this fourteen days.
Earl of Douglas. That's the worst tidings that I hear of yet.
Earl of Worcester. Ay, by my faith, that bears a frosty sound. 2355
Hotspur (Henry Percy). What may the king's whole battle reach unto?
Vernon. To thirty thousand.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Forty let it be: 
My father and Glendower being both away, 
The powers of us may serve so great a day 2360
Come, let us take a muster speedily: 
Doomsday is near; die all, die merrily.
Earl of Douglas. Talk not of dying: I am out of fear 
Of death or death's hand for this one-half year.
[Exeunt]

 ---
 . previous scene	     	
Act IV, Scene 2

A public road near Coventry.

     	next scene  .
---
[Enter FALSTAFF and BARDOLPH]

Falstaff. Bardolph, get thee before to Coventry; fill me a 
bottle of sack: our soldiers shall march through; 
we'll to Sutton Co'fil' tonight.
Lord Bardolph. Will you give me money, captain? 2370
Falstaff. Lay out, lay out.
Lord Bardolph. This bottle makes an angel.
Falstaff. An if it do, take it for thy labour; and if it make 
twenty, take them all; I'll answer the coinage. Bid 
my lieutenant Peto meet me at town's end. 2375
Lord Bardolph. I will, captain: farewell.
[Exit]

Falstaff. If I be not ashamed of my soldiers, I am a soused 
gurnet. I have misused the king's press damnably. 
I have got, in exchange of a hundred and fifty 2380
soldiers, three hundred and odd pounds. I press me 
none but good house-holders, yeoman's sons; inquire 
me out contracted bachelors, such as had been asked 
twice on the banns; such a commodity of warm slaves, 
as had as lieve hear the devil as a drum; such as 2385
fear the report of a caliver worse than a struck 
fowl or a hurt wild-duck. I pressed me none but such 
toasts-and-butter, with hearts in their bellies no 
bigger than pins' heads, and they have bought out 
their services; and now my whole charge consists of 2390
ancients, corporals, lieutenants, gentlemen of 
companies, slaves as ragged as Lazarus in the 
painted cloth, where the glutton's dogs licked his 
sores; and such as indeed were never soldiers, but 
discarded unjust serving-men, younger sons to 2395
younger brothers, revolted tapsters and ostlers 
trade-fallen, the cankers of a calm world and a 
long peace, ten times more dishonourable ragged than 
an old faced ancient: and such have I, to fill up 
the rooms of them that have bought out their 2400
services, that you would think that I had a hundred 
and fifty tattered prodigals lately come from 
swine-keeping, from eating draff and husks. A mad 
fellow met me on the way and told me I had unloaded 
all the gibbets and pressed the dead bodies. No eye 2405
hath seen such scarecrows. I'll not march through 
Coventry with them, that's flat: nay, and the 
villains march wide betwixt the legs, as if they had 
gyves on; for indeed I had the most of them out of 
prison. There's but a shirt and a half in all my 2410
company; and the half shirt is two napkins tacked 
together and thrown over the shoulders like an 
herald's coat without sleeves; and the shirt, to say 
the truth, stolen from my host at Saint Alban's, or 
the red-nose innkeeper of Daventry. But that's all 2415
one; they'll find linen enough on every hedge.
[Enter the PRINCE and WESTMORELAND]

Henry V. How now, blown Jack! how now, quilt!
Falstaff. What, Hal! how now, mad wag! what a devil dost thou 
in Warwickshire? My good Lord of Westmoreland, I 2420
cry you mercy: I thought your honour had already been 
at Shrewsbury.
Earl of Westmoreland. Faith, Sir John,'tis more than time that I were 
there, and you too; but my powers are there already. 
The king, I can tell you, looks for us all: we must 2425
away all night.
Falstaff. Tut, never fear me: I am as vigilant as a cat to 
steal cream.
Henry V. I think, to steal cream indeed, for thy theft hath 
already made thee butter. But tell me, Jack, whose 2430
fellows are these that come after?
Falstaff. Mine, Hal, mine.
Henry V. I did never see such pitiful rascals.
Falstaff. Tut, tut; good enough to toss; food for powder, food 
for powder; they'll fill a pit as well as better: 2435
tush, man, mortal men, mortal men.
Earl of Westmoreland. Ay, but, Sir John, methinks they are exceeding poor 
and bare, too beggarly.
Falstaff. 'Faith, for their poverty, I know not where they had 
that; and for their bareness, I am sure they never 2440
learned that of me.
Henry V. No I'll be sworn; unless you call three fingers on 
the ribs bare. But, sirrah, make haste: Percy is 
already in the field.
Falstaff. What, is the king encamped? 2445
Earl of Westmoreland. He is, Sir John: I fear we shall stay too long.
Falstaff. Well, 
To the latter end of a fray and the beginning of a feast 
Fits a dull fighter and a keen guest.
[Exeunt]

 ---
 . previous scene	     	
Act IV, Scene 3

The rebel camp near Shrewsbury.

     	next scene  .
---
[Enter HOTSPUR, WORCESTER, DOUGLAS, and VERNON]

Hotspur (Henry Percy). We'll fight with him to-night.
Earl of Worcester. It may not be.
Earl of Douglas. You give him then the advantage.
Vernon. Not a whit. 2455
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Why say you so? looks he not for supply?
Vernon. So do we.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). His is certain, ours is doubtful.
Earl of Worcester. Good cousin, be advised; stir not tonight.
Vernon. Do not, my lord. 2460
Earl of Douglas. You do not counsel well: 
You speak it out of fear and cold heart.
Vernon. Do me no slander, Douglas: by my life, 
And I dare well maintain it with my life, 
If well-respected honour bid me on, 2465
I hold as little counsel with weak fear 
As you, my lord, or any Scot that this day lives: 
Let it be seen to-morrow in the battle 
Which of us fears.
Earl of Douglas. Yea, or to-night. 2470
Vernon. Content.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). To-night, say I.
Vernon. Come, come it nay not be. I wonder much, 
Being men of such great leading as you are, 
That you foresee not what impediments 2475
Drag back our expedition: certain horse 
Of my cousin Vernon's are not yet come up: 
Your uncle Worcester's horse came but today; 
And now their pride and mettle is asleep, 
Their courage with hard labour tame and dull, 2480
That not a horse is half the half of himself.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). So are the horses of the enemy 
In general, journey-bated and brought low: 
The better part of ours are full of rest.
Earl of Worcester. The number of the king exceedeth ours: 2485
For God's sake. cousin, stay till all come in.
[The trumpet sounds a parley]

[Enter SIR WALTER BLUNT]

Blunt. I come with gracious offers from the king, 
if you vouchsafe me hearing and respect. 2490
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Welcome, Sir Walter Blunt; and would to God 
You were of our determination! 
Some of us love you well; and even those some 
Envy your great deservings and good name, 
Because you are not of our quality, 2495
But stand against us like an enemy.
Blunt. And God defend but still I should stand so, 
So long as out of limit and true rule 
You stand against anointed majesty. 
But to my charge. The king hath sent to know 2500
The nature of your griefs, and whereupon 
You conjure from the breast of civil peace 
Such bold hostility, teaching his duteous land 
Audacious cruelty. If that the king 
Have any way your good deserts forgot, 2505
Which he confesseth to be manifold, 
He bids you name your griefs; and with all speed 
You shall have your desires with interest 
And pardon absolute for yourself and these 
Herein misled by your suggestion. 2510
Hotspur (Henry Percy). The king is kind; and well we know the king 
Knows at what time to promise, when to pay. 
My father and my uncle and myself 
Did give him that same royalty he wears; 
And when he was not six and twenty strong, 2515
Sick in the world's regard, wretched and low, 
A poor unminded outlaw sneaking home, 
My father gave him welcome to the shore; 
And when he heard him swear and vow to God 
He came but to be Duke of Lancaster, 2520
To sue his livery and beg his peace, 
With tears of innocency and terms of zeal, 
My father, in kind heart and pity moved, 
Swore him assistance and perform'd it too. 
Now when the lords and barons of the realm 2525
Perceived Northumberland did lean to him, 
The more and less came in with cap and knee; 
Met him in boroughs, cities, villages, 
Attended him on bridges, stood in lanes, 
Laid gifts before him, proffer'd him their oaths, 2530
Gave him their heirs, as pages follow'd him 
Even at the heels in golden multitudes. 
He presently, as greatness knows itself, 
Steps me a little higher than his vow 
Made to my father, while his blood was poor, 2535
Upon the naked shore at Ravenspurgh; 
And now, forsooth, takes on him to reform 
Some certain edicts and some strait decrees 
That lie too heavy on the commonwealth, 
Cries out upon abuses, seems to weep 2540
Over his country's wrongs; and by this face, 
This seeming brow of justice, did he win 
The hearts of all that he did angle for; 
Proceeded further; cut me off the heads 
Of all the favourites that the absent king 2545
In deputation left behind him here, 
When he was personal in the Irish war.
Blunt. Tut, I came not to hear this.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Then to the point. 
In short time after, he deposed the king; 2550
Soon after that, deprived him of his life; 
And in the neck of that, task'd the whole state: 
To make that worse, suffer'd his kinsman March, 
Who is, if every owner were well placed, 
Indeed his king, to be engaged in Wales, 2555
There without ransom to lie forfeited; 
Disgraced me in my happy victories, 
Sought to entrap me by intelligence; 
Rated mine uncle from the council-board; 
In rage dismiss'd my father from the court; 2560
Broke oath on oath, committed wrong on wrong, 
And in conclusion drove us to seek out 
This head of safety; and withal to pry 
Into his title, the which we find 
Too indirect for long continuance. 2565
Blunt. Shall I return this answer to the king?
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Not so, Sir Walter: we'll withdraw awhile. 
Go to the king; and let there be impawn'd 
Some surety for a safe return again, 
And in the morning early shall my uncle 2570
Bring him our purposes: and so farewell.
Blunt. I would you would accept of grace and love.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). And may be so we shall.
Blunt. Pray God you do.
[Exeunt]

 ---
 . previous scene	     	
Act IV, Scene 4

York. The ARCHBISHOP’S palace.

     	 
---
[Enter the ARCHBISHOP and SIR MICHAEL]

Archbishop Scroop. Hie, good Sir Michael; bear this sealed brief 
With winged haste to the lord marshal; 
This to my cousin Scroop, and all the rest 
To whom they are directed. If you knew 2580
How much they do to import, you would make haste.
Sir Michael. My good lord, 
I guess their tenor.
Archbishop Scroop. Like enough you do. 
To-morrow, good Sir Michael, is a day 2585
Wherein the fortune of ten thousand men 
Must bide the touch; for, sir, at Shrewsbury, 
As I am truly given to understand, 
The king with mighty and quick-raised power 
Meets with Lord Harry: and, I fear, Sir Michael, 2590
What with the sickness of Northumberland, 
Whose power was in the first proportion, 
And what with Owen Glendower's absence thence, 
Who with them was a rated sinew too 
And comes not in, o'er-ruled by prophecies, 2595
I fear the power of Percy is too weak 
To wage an instant trial with the king.
Sir Michael. Why, my good lord, you need not fear; 
There is Douglas and Lord Mortimer.
Archbishop Scroop. No, Mortimer is not there. 2600
Sir Michael. But there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy, 
And there is my Lord of Worcester and a head 
Of gallant warriors, noble gentlemen.
Archbishop Scroop. And so there is: but yet the king hath drawn 
The special head of all the land together: 2605
The Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster, 
The noble Westmoreland and warlike Blunt; 
And moe corrivals and dear men 
Of estimation and command in arms.
Sir Michael. Doubt not, my lord, they shall be well opposed. 2610
Archbishop Scroop. I hope no less, yet needful 'tis to fear; 
And, to prevent the worst, Sir Michael, speed: 
For if Lord Percy thrive not, ere the king 
Dismiss his power, he means to visit us, 
For he hath heard of our confederacy, 2615
And 'tis but wisdom to make strong against him: 
Therefore make haste. I must go write again 
To other friends; and so farewell, Sir Michael.
[Exeunt]
Henry IV. How bloodily the sun begins to peer 
Above yon busky hill! the day looks pale 
At his distemperature.
Henry V. The southern wind 
Doth play the trumpet to his purposes, 2625
And by his hollow whistling in the leaves 
Foretells a tempest and a blustering day.
Henry IV. Then with the losers let it sympathize, 
For nothing can seem foul to those that win. 
[The trumpet sounds] 2630
[Enter WORCESTER and VERNON] 
How now, my Lord of Worcester! 'tis not well 
That you and I should meet upon such terms 
As now we meet. You have deceived our trust, 
And made us doff our easy robes of peace, 2635
To crush our old limbs in ungentle steel: 
This is not well, my lord, this is not well. 
What say you to it? will you again unknit 
This curlish knot of all-abhorred war? 
And move in that obedient orb again 2640
Where you did give a fair and natural light, 
And be no more an exhaled meteor, 
A prodigy of fear and a portent 
Of broached mischief to the unborn times?
Earl of Worcester. Hear me, my liege: 2645
For mine own part, I could be well content 
To entertain the lag-end of my life 
With quiet hours; for I do protest, 
I have not sought the day of this dislike.
Henry IV. You have not sought it! how comes it, then? 2650
Falstaff. Rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.
Henry V. Peace, chewet, peace!
Earl of Worcester. It pleased your majesty to turn your looks 
Of favour from myself and all our house; 
And yet I must remember you, my lord, 2655
We were the first and dearest of your friends. 
For you my staff of office did I break 
In Richard's time; and posted day and night 
to meet you on the way, and kiss your hand, 
When yet you were in place and in account 2660
Nothing so strong and fortunate as I. 
It was myself, my brother and his son, 
That brought you home and boldly did outdare 
The dangers of the time. You swore to us, 
And you did swear that oath at Doncaster, 2665
That you did nothing purpose 'gainst the state; 
Nor claim no further than your new-fall'n right, 
The seat of Gaunt, dukedom of Lancaster: 
To this we swore our aid. But in short space 
It rain'd down fortune showering on your head; 2670
And such a flood of greatness fell on you, 
What with our help, what with the absent king, 
What with the injuries of a wanton time, 
The seeming sufferances that you had borne, 
And the contrarious winds that held the king 2675
So long in his unlucky Irish wars 
That all in England did repute him dead: 
And from this swarm of fair advantages 
You took occasion to be quickly woo'd 
To gripe the general sway into your hand; 2680
Forget your oath to us at Doncaster; 
And being fed by us you used us so 
As that ungentle hull, the cuckoo's bird, 
Useth the sparrow; did oppress our nest; 
Grew by our feeding to so great a bulk 2685
That even our love durst not come near your sight 
For fear of swallowing; but with nimble wing 
We were enforced, for safety sake, to fly 
Out of sight and raise this present head; 
Whereby we stand opposed by such means 2690
As you yourself have forged against yourself 
By unkind usage, dangerous countenance, 
And violation of all faith and troth 
Sworn to us in your younger enterprise.
Henry IV. These things indeed you have articulate, 2695
Proclaim'd at market-crosses, read in churches, 
To face the garment of rebellion 
With some fine colour that may please the eye 
Of fickle changelings and poor discontents, 
Which gape and rub the elbow at the news 2700
Of hurlyburly innovation: 
And never yet did insurrection want 
Such water-colours to impaint his cause; 
Nor moody beggars, starving for a time 
Of pellmell havoc and confusion. 2705
Henry V. In both your armies there is many a soul 
Shall pay full dearly for this encounter, 
If once they join in trial. Tell your nephew, 
The Prince of Wales doth join with all the world 
In praise of Henry Percy: by my hopes, 2710
This present enterprise set off his head, 
I do not think a braver gentleman, 
More active-valiant or more valiant-young, 
More daring or more bold, is now alive 
To grace this latter age with noble deeds. 2715
For my part, I may speak it to my shame, 
I have a truant been to chivalry; 
And so I hear he doth account me too; 
Yet this before my father's majesty— 
I am content that he shall take the odds 2720
Of his great name and estimation, 
And will, to save the blood on either side, 
Try fortune with him in a single fight.
Henry IV. And, Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee, 
Albeit considerations infinite 2725
Do make against it. No, good Worcester, no, 
We love our people well; even those we love 
That are misled upon your cousin's part; 
And, will they take the offer of our grace, 
Both he and they and you, every man 2730
Shall be my friend again and I'll be his: 
So tell your cousin, and bring me word 
What he will do: but if he will not yield, 
Rebuke and dread correction wait on us 
And they shall do their office. So, be gone; 2735
We will not now be troubled with reply: 
We offer fair; take it advisedly.
[Exeunt WORCESTER and VERNON]

Henry V. It will not be accepted, on my life: 
The Douglas and the Hotspur both together 2740
Are confident against the world in arms.
Henry IV. Hence, therefore, every leader to his charge; 
For, on their answer, will we set on them: 
And God befriend us, as our cause is just!
[Exeunt all but PRINCE HENRY and FALSTAFF]

Falstaff. Hal, if thou see me down in the battle and bestride 
me, so; 'tis a point of friendship.
Henry V. Nothing but a colossus can do thee that friendship. 
Say thy prayers, and farewell.
Falstaff. I would 'twere bed-time, Hal, and all well. 2750
Henry V. Why, thou owest God a death.
[Exit PRINCE HENRY]

Falstaff. 'Tis not due yet; I would be loath to pay him before 
his day. What need I be so forward with him that 
calls not on me? Well, 'tis no matter; honour pricks 2755
me on. Yea, but how if honour prick me off when I 
come on? how then? Can honour set to a leg? no: or 
an arm? no: or take away the grief of a wound? no. 
Honour hath no skill in surgery, then? no. What is 
honour? a word. What is in that word honour? what 2760
is that honour? air. A trim reckoning! Who hath it? 
he that died o' Wednesday. Doth he feel it? no. 
Doth he hear it? no. 'Tis insensible, then. Yea, 
to the dead. But will it not live with the living? 
no. Why? detraction will not suffer it. Therefore 2765
I'll none of it. Honour is a mere scutcheon: and so 
ends my catechism.
[Exit]

 ---
 . previous scene	     	
Act V, Scene 2

The rebel camp.

     	next scene  .
---
[Enter WORCESTER and VERNON]

Earl of Worcester. O, no, my nephew must not know, Sir Richard, 2770
The liberal and kind offer of the king.
Vernon. 'Twere best he did.
Earl of Worcester. Then are we all undone. 
It is not possible, it cannot be, 
The king should keep his word in loving us; 2775
He will suspect us still and find a time 
To punish this offence in other faults: 
Suspicion all our lives shall be stuck full of eyes; 
For treason is but trusted like the fox, 
Who, ne'er so tame, so cherish'd and lock'd up, 2780
Will have a wild trick of his ancestors. 
Look how we can, or sad or merrily, 
Interpretation will misquote our looks, 
And we shall feed like oxen at a stall, 
The better cherish'd, still the nearer death. 2785
My nephew's trespass may be well forgot; 
it hath the excuse of youth and heat of blood, 
And an adopted name of privilege, 
A hair-brain'd Hotspur, govern'd by a spleen: 
All his offences live upon my head 2790
And on his father's; we did train him on, 
And, his corruption being ta'en from us, 
We, as the spring of all, shall pay for all. 
Therefore, good cousin, let not Harry know, 
In any case, the offer of the king. 2795
Vernon. Deliver what you will; I'll say 'tis so. 
Here comes your cousin.
[Enter HOTSPUR and DOUGLAS]

Hotspur (Henry Percy). My uncle is return'd: 
Deliver up my Lord of Westmoreland. 2800
Uncle, what news?
Earl of Worcester. The king will bid you battle presently.
Earl of Douglas. Defy him by the Lord of Westmoreland.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Lord Douglas, go you and tell him so.
Earl of Douglas. Marry, and shall, and very willingly. 2805
[Exit]

Earl of Worcester. There is no seeming mercy in the king.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Did you beg any? God forbid!
Earl of Worcester. I told him gently of our grievances, 
Of his oath-breaking; which he mended thus, 2810
By now forswearing that he is forsworn: 
He calls us rebels, traitors; and will scourge 
With haughty arms this hateful name in us.
[Re-enter the EARL OF DOUGLAS]

Earl of Douglas. Arm, gentlemen; to arms! for I have thrown 2815
A brave defiance in King Henry's teeth, 
And Westmoreland, that was engaged, did bear it; 
Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.
Earl of Worcester. The Prince of Wales stepp'd forth before the king, 
And, nephew, challenged you to single fight. 2820
Hotspur (Henry Percy). O, would the quarrel lay upon our heads, 
And that no man might draw short breath today 
But I and Harry Monmouth! Tell me, tell me, 
How show'd his tasking? seem'd it in contempt?
Vernon. No, by my soul; I never in my life 2825
Did hear a challenge urged more modestly, 
Unless a brother should a brother dare 
To gentle exercise and proof of arms. 
He gave you all the duties of a man; 
Trimm'd up your praises with a princely tongue, 2830
Spoke to your deservings like a chronicle, 
Making you ever better than his praise 
By still dispraising praise valued in you; 
And, which became him like a prince indeed, 
He made a blushing cital of himself; 2835
And chid his truant youth with such a grace 
As if he master'd there a double spirit. 
Of teaching and of learning instantly. 
There did he pause: but let me tell the world, 
If he outlive the envy of this day, 2840
England did never owe so sweet a hope, 
So much misconstrued in his wantonness.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Cousin, I think thou art enamoured 
On his follies: never did I hear 
Of any prince so wild a libertine. 2845
But be he as he will, yet once ere night 
I will embrace him with a soldier's arm, 
That he shall shrink under my courtesy. 
Arm, arm with speed: and, fellows, soldiers, friends, 
Better consider what you have to do 2850
Than I, that have not well the gift of tongue, 
Can lift your blood up with persuasion.
[Enter a Messenger]

Messenger. My lord, here are letters for you.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). I cannot read them now. 2855
O gentlemen, the time of life is short! 
To spend that shortness basely were too long, 
If life did ride upon a dial's point, 
Still ending at the arrival of an hour. 
An if we live, we live to tread on kings; 2860
If die, brave death, when princes die with us! 
Now, for our consciences, the arms are fair, 
When the intent of bearing them is just.
[Enter another Messenger]

Messenger. My lord, prepare; the king comes on apace. 2865
Hotspur (Henry Percy). I thank him, that he cuts me from my tale, 
For I profess not talking; only this— 
Let each man do his best: and here draw I 
A sword, whose temper I intend to stain 
With the best blood that I can meet withal 2870
In the adventure of this perilous day. 
Now, Esperance! Percy! and set on. 
Sound all the lofty instruments of war, 
And by that music let us all embrace; 
For, heaven to earth, some of us never shall 2875
A second time do such a courtesy.
[The trumpets sound. They embrace, and exeunt]

 ---
 . previous scene	     	
Act V, Scene 3

Plain between the camps.

     	next scene  .
---
[KING HENRY enters with his power. Alarum to the battle. Then enter DOUGLAS and SIR WALTER BLUNT]

Blunt. What is thy name, that in the battle thus 
Thou crossest me? what honour dost thou seek 2880
Upon my head?
Earl of Douglas. Know then, my name is Douglas; 
And I do haunt thee in the battle thus 
Because some tell me that thou art a king.
Blunt. They tell thee true. 2885
Earl of Douglas. The Lord of Stafford dear to-day hath bought 
Thy likeness, for instead of thee, King Harry, 
This sword hath ended him: so shall it thee, 
Unless thou yield thee as my prisoner.
Blunt. I was not born a yielder, thou proud Scot; 2890
And thou shalt find a king that will revenge 
Lord Stafford's death.
[They fight. DOUGLAS kills SIR WALTER BLUNT.

Enter HOTSPUR]

Hotspur (Henry Percy). O Douglas, hadst thou fought at Holmedon thus, 2895
never had triumph'd upon a Scot.
Earl of Douglas. All's done, all's won; here breathless lies the king.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Where?
Earl of Douglas. Here.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). This, Douglas? no: I know this face full well: 2900
A gallant knight he was, his name was Blunt; 
Semblably furnish'd like the king himself.
Earl of Douglas. A fool go with thy soul, whither it goes! 
A borrow'd title hast thou bought too dear: 
Why didst thou tell me that thou wert a king? 2905
Hotspur (Henry Percy). The king hath many marching in his coats.
Earl of Douglas. Now, by my sword, I will kill all his coats; 
I'll murder all his wardrobe, piece by piece, 
Until I meet the king.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Up, and away! 2910
Our soldiers stand full fairly for the day.
[Exeunt]

[Alarum. Enter FALSTAFF, solus]

Falstaff. Though I could 'scape shot-free at London, I fear 
the shot here; here's no scoring but upon the pate. 2915
Soft! who are you? Sir Walter Blunt: there's honour 
for you! here's no vanity! I am as hot as moulten 
lead, and as heavy too: God keep lead out of me! I 
need no more weight than mine own bowels. I have 
led my ragamuffins where they are peppered: there's 2920
not three of my hundred and fifty left alive; and 
they are for the town's end, to beg during life. 
But who comes here?
[Enter PRINCE HENRY]

Henry V. What, stand'st thou idle here? lend me thy sword: 2925
Many a nobleman lies stark and stiff 
Under the hoofs of vaunting enemies, 
Whose deaths are yet unrevenged: I prithee, 
lend me thy sword.
Falstaff. O Hal, I prithee, give me leave to breathe awhile. 2930
Turk Gregory never did such deeds in arms as I have 
done this day. I have paid Percy, I have made him sure.
Henry V. He is, indeed; and living to kill thee. I prithee, 
lend me thy sword.
Falstaff. Nay, before God, Hal, if Percy be alive, thou get'st 2935
not my sword; but take my pistol, if thou wilt.
Henry V. Give it to me: what, is it in the case?
Falstaff. Ay, Hal; 'tis hot, 'tis hot; there's that will sack a city.
[PRINCE HENRY draws it out, and finds it to be a bottle of sack]

Henry V. What, is it a time to jest and dally now? 2940
[He throws the bottle at him. Exit]

Falstaff. Well, if Percy be alive, I'll pierce him. If he do 
come in my way, so: if he do not, if I come in his 
willingly, let him make a carbonado of me. I like 
not such grinning honour as Sir Walter hath: give me 2945
life: which if I can save, so; if not, honour comes 
unlooked for, and there's an end.
[Exit FALSTAFF]

 ---
 . previous scene	     	
Act V, Scene 4

Another part of the field.

     	next scene  .
---
[Alarum. Excursions. Enter PRINCE HENRY, LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER, and EARL OF WESTMORELAND]

Henry IV. I prithee, 2950
Harry, withdraw thyself; thou bleed'st too much. 
Lord John of Lancaster, go you with him.
Prince John. Not I, my lord, unless I did bleed too.
Henry V. I beseech your majesty, make up, 
Lest your retirement do amaze your friends. 2955
Henry IV. I will do so. 
My Lord of Westmoreland, lead him to his tent.
Earl of Westmoreland. Come, my lord, I'll lead you to your tent.
Henry V. Lead me, my lord? I do not need your help: 
And God forbid a shallow scratch should drive 2960
The Prince of Wales from such a field as this, 
Where stain'd nobility lies trodden on, 
and rebels' arms triumph in massacres!
Prince John. We breathe too long: come, cousin Westmoreland, 
Our duty this way lies; for God's sake come. 2965
[Exeunt LANCASTER and WESTMORELAND]

Henry V. By God, thou hast deceived me, Lancaster; 
I did not think thee lord of such a spirit: 
Before, I loved thee as a brother, John; 
But now, I do respect thee as my soul. 2970
Henry IV. I saw him hold Lord Percy at the point 
With lustier maintenance than I did look for 
Of such an ungrown warrior.
Henry V. O, this boy 
Lends mettle to us all! 2975
[Exit]

[Enter DOUGLAS]

Earl of Douglas. Another king! they grow like Hydra's heads: 
I am the Douglas, fatal to all those 
That wear those colours on them: what art thou, 2980
That counterfeit'st the person of a king?
Henry IV. The king himself; who, Douglas, grieves at heart 
So many of his shadows thou hast met 
And not the very king. I have two boys 
Seek Percy and thyself about the field: 2985
But, seeing thou fall'st on me so luckily, 
I will assay thee: so, defend thyself.
Earl of Douglas. I fear thou art another counterfeit; 
And yet, in faith, thou bear'st thee like a king: 
But mine I am sure thou art, whoe'er thou be, 2990
And thus I win thee.
[They fight. KING HENRY being in danger, PRINCE HENRY enters]

Henry V. Hold up thy head, vile Scot, or thou art like 
Never to hold it up again! the spirits 
Of valiant Shirley, Stafford, Blunt, are in my arms: 2995
It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee; 
Who never promiseth but he means to pay. 
[They fight: DOUGLAS flies] 
Cheerly, my lord. how fares your grace? 
Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for succor sent, 3000
And so hath Clifton: I'll to Clifton straight.
Henry IV. Stay, and breathe awhile: 
Thou hast redeem'd thy lost opinion, 
And show'd thou makest some tender of my life, 
In this fair rescue thou hast brought to me. 3005
Henry V. O God! they did me too much injury 
That ever said I hearken'd for your death. 
If it were so, I might have let alone 
The insulting hand of Douglas over you, 
Which would have been as speedy in your end 3010
As all the poisonous potions in the world 
And saved the treacherous labour of your son.
Henry IV. Make up to Clifton: I'll to Sir Nicholas Gawsey.
[Exit]

[Enter HOTSPUR]

Hotspur (Henry Percy). If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth.
Henry V. Thou speak'st as if I would deny my name.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). My name is Harry Percy.
Henry V. Why, then I see 
A very valiant rebel of the name. 3020
I am the Prince of Wales; and think not, Percy, 
To share with me in glory any more: 
Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere; 
Nor can one England brook a double reign, 
Of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales. 3025
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Nor shall it, Harry; for the hour is come 
To end the one of us; and would to God 
Thy name in arms were now as great as mine!
Henry V. I'll make it greater ere I part from thee; 
And all the budding honours on thy crest 3030
I'll crop, to make a garland for my head.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). I can no longer brook thy vanities.
[They fight]

[Enter FALSTAFF]

Falstaff. Well said, Hal! to it Hal! Nay, you shall find no 3035
boy's play here, I can tell you. 
[Re-enter DOUGLAS; he fights with FALSTAFF,] 
who falls down as if he were dead, and exit 
DOUGLAS. HOTSPUR is wounded, and falls]
Hotspur (Henry Percy). O, Harry, thou hast robb'd me of my youth! 3040
I better brook the loss of brittle life 
Than those proud titles thou hast won of me; 
They wound my thoughts worse than sword my flesh: 
But thought's the slave of life, and life time's fool; 
And time, that takes survey of all the world, 3045
Must have a stop. O, I could prophesy, 
But that the earthy and cold hand of death 
Lies on my tongue: no, Percy, thou art dust 
And food for—
[Dies]

Henry V. For worms, brave Percy: fare thee well, great heart! 
Ill-weaved ambition, how much art thou shrunk! 
When that this body did contain a spirit, 
A kingdom for it was too small a bound; 
But now two paces of the vilest earth 3055
Is room enough: this earth that bears thee dead 
Bears not alive so stout a gentleman. 
If thou wert sensible of courtesy, 
I should not make so dear a show of zeal: 
But let my favours hide thy mangled face; 3060
And, even in thy behalf, I'll thank myself 
For doing these fair rites of tenderness. 
Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven! 
Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave, 
But not remember'd in thy epitaph! 3065
[He spieth FALSTAFF on the ground] 
What, old acquaintance! could not all this flesh 
Keep in a little life? Poor Jack, farewell! 
I could have better spared a better man: 
O, I should have a heavy miss of thee, 3070
If I were much in love with vanity! 
Death hath not struck so fat a deer to-day, 
Though many dearer, in this bloody fray. 
Embowell'd will I see thee by and by: 
Till then in blood by noble Percy lie. 3075
[Exit PRINCE HENRY]

Falstaff. [Rising up] Embowelled! if thou embowel me to-day, 
I'll give you leave to powder me and eat me too 
to-morrow. 'Sblood,'twas time to counterfeit, or 
that hot termagant Scot had paid me scot and lot too. 3080
Counterfeit? I lie, I am no counterfeit: to die, 
is to be a counterfeit; for he is but the 
counterfeit of a man who hath not the life of a man: 
but to counterfeit dying, when a man thereby 
liveth, is to be no counterfeit, but the true and 3085
perfect image of life indeed. The better part of 
valour is discretion; in the which better part I 
have saved my life.'Zounds, I am afraid of this 
gunpowder Percy, though he be dead: how, if he 
should counterfeit too and rise? by my faith, I am 3090
afraid he would prove the better counterfeit. 
Therefore I'll make him sure; yea, and I'll swear I 
killed him. Why may not he rise as well as I? 
Nothing confutes me but eyes, and nobody sees me. 
Therefore, sirrah, 3095
[Stabbing him] 
with a new wound in your thigh, come you along with me.
[Takes up HOTSPUR on his back]

[Re-enter PRINCE HENRY and LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER]

Henry V. Come, brother John; full bravely hast thou flesh'd 3100
Thy maiden sword.
Prince John. But, soft! whom have we here? 
Did you not tell me this fat man was dead?
Henry V. I did; I saw him dead, 
Breathless and bleeding on the ground. Art 3105
thou alive? 
Or is it fantasy that plays upon our eyesight? 
I prithee, speak; we will not trust our eyes 
Without our ears: thou art not what thou seem'st.
Falstaff. No, that's certain; I am not a double man: but if I 3110
be not Jack Falstaff, then am I a Jack. There is Percy: 
[Throwing the body down] 
if your father will do me any honour, so; if not, let 
him kill the next Percy himself. I look to be either 
earl or duke, I can assure you. 3115
Henry V. Why, Percy I killed myself and saw thee dead.
Falstaff. Didst thou? Lord, Lord, how this world is given to 
lying! I grant you I was down and out of breath; 
and so was he: but we rose both at an instant and 
fought a long hour by Shrewsbury clock. If I may be 3120
believed, so; if not, let them that should reward 
valour bear the sin upon their own heads. I'll take 
it upon my death, I gave him this wound in the 
thigh: if the man were alive and would deny it, 
'zounds, I would make him eat a piece of my sword. 3125
Prince John. This is the strangest tale that ever I heard.
Henry V. This is the strangest fellow, brother John. 
Come, bring your luggage nobly on your back: 
For my part, if a lie may do thee grace, 
I'll gild it with the happiest terms I have. 3130
[A retreat is sounded] 
The trumpet sounds retreat; the day is ours. 
Come, brother, let us to the highest of the field, 
To see what friends are living, who are dead.
[Exeunt PRINCE HENRY and LANCASTER]

Falstaff. I'll follow, as they say, for reward. He that 
rewards me, God reward him! If I do grow great, 
I'll grow less; for I'll purge, and leave sack, and 
live cleanly as a nobleman should do.
[Exit]

 ---
 . previous scene	     	
Act V, Scene 5

Another part of the field.

     	 
---
[The trumpets sound. Enter KING HENRY IV, PRINCE HENRY, LORD JOHN LANCASTER, EARL OF WESTMORELAND, with WORCESTER and VERNON prisoners]

Henry IV. Thus ever did rebellion find rebuke. 
Ill-spirited Worcester! did not we send grace, 
Pardon and terms of love to all of you? 
And wouldst thou turn our offers contrary? 3145
Misuse the tenor of thy kinsman's trust? 
Three knights upon our party slain to-day, 
A noble earl and many a creature else 
Had been alive this hour, 
If like a Christian thou hadst truly borne 3150
Betwixt our armies true intelligence.
Earl of Worcester. What I have done my safety urged me to; 
And I embrace this fortune patiently, 
Since not to be avoided it falls on me.
Henry IV. Bear Worcester to the death and Vernon too: 3155
Other offenders we will pause upon. 
[Exeunt WORCESTER and VERNON, guarded] 
How goes the field?
Henry V. The noble Scot, Lord Douglas, when he saw 
The fortune of the day quite turn'd from him, 3160
The noble Percy slain, and all his men 
Upon the foot of fear, fled with the rest; 
And falling from a hill, he was so bruised 
That the pursuers took him. At my tent 
The Douglas is; and I beseech your grace 3165
I may dispose of him.
Henry IV. With all my heart.
Henry V. Then, brother John of Lancaster, to you 
This honourable bounty shall belong: 
Go to the Douglas, and deliver him 3170
Up to his pleasure, ransomless and free: 
His valour shown upon our crests to-day 
Hath taught us how to cherish such high deeds 
Even in the bosom of our adversaries.
Prince John. I thank your grace for this high courtesy, 3175
Which I shall give away immediately.
Henry IV. Then this remains, that we divide our power. 
You, son John, and my cousin Westmoreland 
Towards York shall bend you with your dearest speed, 
To meet Northumberland and the prelate Scroop, 3180
Who, as we hear, are busily in arms: 
Myself and you, son Harry, will towards Wales, 
To fight with Glendower and the Earl of March. 
Rebellion in this land shall lose his sway, 
Meeting the cheque of such another day: 3185
And since this business so fair is done, 
Let us not leave till all our own be won.
[Exeunt]
