[Enter KING HENRY, LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER, the EARL of WESTMORELAND, SIR WALTER BLUNT, and others]

Henry IV. So shaken as we are, so wan with care, 
Find we a time for frighted peace to pant, 
And breathe short-winded accents of new broils 
To be commenced in strands afar remote. 5
No more the thirsty entrance of this soil 
Shall daub her lips with her own children's blood; 
Nor more shall trenching war channel her fields, 
Nor bruise her flowerets with the armed hoofs 
Of hostile paces: those opposed eyes, 10
Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven, 
All of one nature, of one substance bred, 
Did lately meet in the intestine shock 
And furious close of civil butchery 
Shall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks, 15
March all one way and be no more opposed 
Against acquaintance, kindred and allies: 
The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife, 
No more shall cut his master. Therefore, friends, 
As far as to the sepulchre of Christ, 20
Whose soldier now, under whose blessed cross 
We are impressed and engaged to fight, 
Forthwith a power of English shall we levy; 
Whose arms were moulded in their mothers' womb 
To chase these pagans in those holy fields 25
Over whose acres walk'd those blessed feet 
Which fourteen hundred years ago were nail'd 
For our advantage on the bitter cross. 
But this our purpose now is twelve month old, 
And bootless 'tis to tell you we will go: 30
Therefore we meet not now. Then let me hear 
Of you, my gentle cousin Westmoreland, 
What yesternight our council did decree 
In forwarding this dear expedience.
Earl of Westmoreland. My liege, this haste was hot in question, 35
And many limits of the charge set down 
But yesternight: when all athwart there came 
A post from Wales loaden with heavy news; 
Whose worst was, that the noble Mortimer, 
Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight 40
Against the irregular and wild Glendower, 
Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken, 
A thousand of his people butchered; 
Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse, 
Such beastly shameless transformation, 45
By those Welshwomen done as may not be 
Without much shame retold or spoken of.
Henry IV. It seems then that the tidings of this broil 
Brake off our business for the Holy Land.
Earl of Westmoreland. This match'd with other did, my gracious lord; 50
For more uneven and unwelcome news 
Came from the north and thus it did import: 
On Holy-rood day, the gallant Hotspur there, 
Young Harry Percy and brave Archibald, 
That ever-valiant and approved Scot, 55
At Holmedon met, 
Where they did spend a sad and bloody hour, 
As by discharge of their artillery, 
And shape of likelihood, the news was told; 
For he that brought them, in the very heat 60
And pride of their contention did take horse, 
Uncertain of the issue any way.
Henry IV. Here is a dear, a true industrious friend, 
Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his horse. 
Stain'd with the variation of each soil 65
Betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours; 
And he hath brought us smooth and welcome news. 
The Earl of Douglas is discomfited: 
Ten thousand bold Scots, two and twenty knights, 
Balk'd in their own blood did Sir Walter see 70
On Holmedon's plains. Of prisoners, Hotspur took 
Mordake the Earl of Fife, and eldest son 
To beaten Douglas; and the Earl of Athol, 
Of Murray, Angus, and Menteith: 
And is not this an honourable spoil? 75
A gallant prize? ha, cousin, is it not?
Earl of Westmoreland. In faith, 
It is a conquest for a prince to boast of.
Henry IV. Yea, there thou makest me sad and makest me sin 
In envy that my Lord Northumberland 80
Should be the father to so blest a son, 
A son who is the theme of honour's tongue; 
Amongst a grove, the very straightest plant; 
Who is sweet Fortune's minion and her pride: 
Whilst I, by looking on the praise of him, 85
See riot and dishonour stain the brow 
Of my young Harry. O that it could be proved 
That some night-tripping fairy had exchanged 
In cradle-clothes our children where they lay, 
And call'd mine Percy, his Plantagenet! 90
Then would I have his Harry, and he mine. 
But let him from my thoughts. What think you, coz, 
Of this young Percy's pride? the prisoners, 
Which he in this adventure hath surprised, 
To his own use he keeps; and sends me word, 95
I shall have none but Mordake Earl of Fife.
Earl of Westmoreland. This is his uncle's teaching; this is Worcester, 
Malevolent to you in all aspects; 
Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up 
The crest of youth against your dignity. 100
Henry IV. But I have sent for him to answer this; 
And for this cause awhile we must neglect 
Our holy purpose to Jerusalem. 
Cousin, on Wednesday next our council we 
Will hold at Windsor; so inform the lords: 105
But come yourself with speed to us again; 
For more is to be said and to be done 
Than out of anger can be uttered.
Earl of Westmoreland. I will, my liege.
Falstaff. Now, Hal, what time of day is it, lad?
Henry V. Thou art so fat-witted, with drinking of old sack 
and unbuttoning thee after supper and sleeping upon 
benches after noon, that thou hast forgotten to 115
demand that truly which thou wouldst truly know. 
What a devil hast thou to do with the time of the 
day? Unless hours were cups of sack and minutes 
capons and clocks the tongues of bawds and dials the 
signs of leaping-houses and the blessed sun himself 120
a fair hot wench in flame-coloured taffeta, I see no 
reason why thou shouldst be so superfluous to demand 
the time of the day.
Falstaff. Indeed, you come near me now, Hal; for we that take 
purses go by the moon and the seven stars, and not 125
by Phoebus, he,'that wandering knight so fair.' And, 
I prithee, sweet wag, when thou art king, as, God 
save thy grace,—majesty I should say, for grace 
thou wilt have none,—
Henry V. What, none? 130
Falstaff. No, by my troth, not so much as will serve to 
prologue to an egg and butter.
Henry V. Well, how then? come, roundly, roundly.
Falstaff. Marry, then, sweet wag, when thou art king, let not 
us that are squires of the night's body be called 135
thieves of the day's beauty: let us be Diana's 
foresters, gentlemen of the shade, minions of the 
moon; and let men say we be men of good government, 
being governed, as the sea is, by our noble and 
chaste mistress the moon, under whose countenance we steal. 140
Henry V. Thou sayest well, and it holds well too; for the 
fortune of us that are the moon's men doth ebb and 
flow like the sea, being governed, as the sea is, 
by the moon. As, for proof, now: a purse of gold 
most resolutely snatched on Monday night and most 145
dissolutely spent on Tuesday morning; got with 
swearing 'Lay by' and spent with crying 'Bring in;' 
now in as low an ebb as the foot of the ladder 
and by and by in as high a flow as the ridge of the gallows.
Falstaff. By the Lord, thou sayest true, lad. And is not my 150
hostess of the tavern a most sweet wench?
Henry V. As the honey of Hybla, my old lad of the castle. And 
is not a buff jerkin a most sweet robe of durance?
Falstaff. How now, how now, mad wag! what, in thy quips and 
thy quiddities? what a plague have I to do with a 155
buff jerkin?
Henry V. Why, what a pox have I to do with my hostess of the tavern?
Falstaff. Well, thou hast called her to a reckoning many a 
time and oft.
Henry V. Did I ever call for thee to pay thy part? 160
Falstaff. No; I'll give thee thy due, thou hast paid all there.
Henry V. Yea, and elsewhere, so far as my coin would stretch; 
and where it would not, I have used my credit.
Falstaff. Yea, and so used it that were it not here apparent 
that thou art heir apparent—But, I prithee, sweet 165
wag, shall there be gallows standing in England when 
thou art king? and resolution thus fobbed as it is 
with the rusty curb of old father antic the law? Do 
not thou, when thou art king, hang a thief.
Henry V. No; thou shalt. 170
Falstaff. Shall I? O rare! By the Lord, I'll be a brave judge.
Henry V. Thou judgest false already: I mean, thou shalt have 
the hanging of the thieves and so become a rare hangman.
Falstaff. Well, Hal, well; and in some sort it jumps with my 
humour as well as waiting in the court, I can tell 175
you.
Henry V. For obtaining of suits?
Falstaff. Yea, for obtaining of suits, whereof the hangman 
hath no lean wardrobe. 'Sblood, I am as melancholy 
as a gib cat or a lugged bear. 180
Henry V. Or an old lion, or a lover's lute.
Falstaff. Yea, or the drone of a Lincolnshire bagpipe.
Henry V. What sayest thou to a hare, or the melancholy of 
Moor-ditch?
Falstaff. Thou hast the most unsavoury similes and art indeed 185
the most comparative, rascalliest, sweet young 
prince. But, Hal, I prithee, trouble me no more 
with vanity. I would to God thou and I knew where a 
commodity of good names were to be bought. An old 
lord of the council rated me the other day in the 190
street about you, sir, but I marked him not; and yet 
he talked very wisely, but I regarded him not; and 
yet he talked wisely, and in the street too.
Henry V. Thou didst well; for wisdom cries out in the 
streets, and no man regards it. 195
Falstaff. O, thou hast damnable iteration and art indeed able 
to corrupt a saint. Thou hast done much harm upon 
me, Hal; God forgive thee for it! Before I knew 
thee, Hal, I knew nothing; and now am I, if a man 
should speak truly, little better than one of the 200
wicked. I must give over this life, and I will give 
it over: by the Lord, and I do not, I am a villain: 
I'll be damned for never a king's son in 
Christendom.
Henry V. Where shall we take a purse tomorrow, Jack? 205
Falstaff. 'Zounds, where thou wilt, lad; I'll make one; an I 
do not, call me villain and baffle me.
Henry V. I see a good amendment of life in thee; from praying 
to purse-taking.
Falstaff. Why, Hal, 'tis my vocation, Hal; 'tis no sin for a 210
man to labour in his vocation. 
[Enter POINS] 
Poins! Now shall we know if Gadshill have set a 
match. O, if men were to be saved by merit, what 
hole in hell were hot enough for him? This is the 215
most omnipotent villain that ever cried 'Stand' to 
a true man.
Henry V. Good morrow, Ned.
Edward Poins. Good morrow, sweet Hal. What says Monsieur Remorse? 
what says Sir John Sack and Sugar? Jack! how 220
agrees the devil and thee about thy soul, that thou 
soldest him on Good-Friday last for a cup of Madeira 
and a cold capon's leg?
Henry V. Sir John stands to his word, the devil shall have 
his bargain; for he was never yet a breaker of 225
proverbs: he will give the devil his due.
Edward Poins. Then art thou damned for keeping thy word with the devil.
Henry V. Else he had been damned for cozening the devil.
Edward Poins. But, my lads, my lads, to-morrow morning, by four 
o'clock, early at Gadshill! there are pilgrims going 230
to Canterbury with rich offerings, and traders 
riding to London with fat purses: I have vizards 
for you all; you have horses for yourselves: 
Gadshill lies to-night in Rochester: I have bespoke 
supper to-morrow night in Eastcheap: we may do it 235
as secure as sleep. If you will go, I will stuff 
your purses full of crowns; if you will not, tarry 
at home and be hanged.
Falstaff. Hear ye, Yedward; if I tarry at home and go not, 
I'll hang you for going. 240
Edward Poins. You will, chops?
Falstaff. Hal, wilt thou make one?
Henry V. Who, I rob? I a thief? not I, by my faith.
Falstaff. There's neither honesty, manhood, nor good 
fellowship in thee, nor thou camest not of the blood 245
royal, if thou darest not stand for ten shillings.
Henry V. Well then, once in my days I'll be a madcap.
Falstaff. Why, that's well said.
Henry V. Well, come what will, I'll tarry at home.
Falstaff. By the Lord, I'll be a traitor then, when thou art king. 250
Henry V. I care not.
Edward Poins. Sir John, I prithee, leave the prince and me alone: 
I will lay him down such reasons for this adventure 
that he shall go.
Falstaff. Well, God give thee the spirit of persuasion and him 255
the ears of profiting, that what thou speakest may 
move and what he hears may be believed, that the 
true prince may, for recreation sake, prove a false 
thief; for the poor abuses of the time want 
countenance. Farewell: you shall find me in Eastcheap. 260
Henry V. Farewell, thou latter spring! farewell, All-hallown summer!
[Exit Falstaff]

Edward Poins. Now, my good sweet honey lord, ride with us 
to-morrow: I have a jest to execute that I cannot 
manage alone. Falstaff, Bardolph, Peto and Gadshill 265
shall rob those men that we have already waylaid: 
yourself and I will not be there; and when they 
have the booty, if you and I do not rob them, cut 
this head off from my shoulders.
Henry V. How shall we part with them in setting forth? 270
Edward Poins. Why, we will set forth before or after them, and 
appoint them a place of meeting, wherein it is at 
our pleasure to fail, and then will they adventure 
upon the exploit themselves; which they shall have 
no sooner achieved, but we'll set upon them. 275
Henry V. Yea, but 'tis like that they will know us by our 
horses, by our habits and by every other 
appointment, to be ourselves.
Edward Poins. Tut! our horses they shall not see: I'll tie them 
in the wood; our vizards we will change after we 280
leave them: and, sirrah, I have cases of buckram 
for the nonce, to immask our noted outward garments.
Henry V. Yea, but I doubt they will be too hard for us.
Edward Poins. Well, for two of them, I know them to be as 
true-bred cowards as ever turned back; and for the 285
third, if he fight longer than he sees reason, I'll 
forswear arms. The virtue of this jest will be, the 
incomprehensible lies that this same fat rogue will 
tell us when we meet at supper: how thirty, at 
least, he fought with; what wards, what blows, what 290
extremities he endured; and in the reproof of this 
lies the jest.
Henry V. Well, I'll go with thee: provide us all things 
necessary and meet me to-morrow night in Eastcheap; 
there I'll sup. Farewell. 295
Edward Poins. Farewell, my lord.
[Exit Poins]

Henry V. I know you all, and will awhile uphold 
V. My blood hath been too cold and temperate, 
Unapt to stir at these indignities, 
And you have found me; for accordingly 325
You tread upon my patience: but be sure 
I will from henceforth rather be myself, 
Mighty and to be fear'd, than my condition; 
Which hath been smooth as oil, soft as young down, 
And therefore lost that title of respect 330
Which the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud.
Earl of Worcester. Our house, my sovereign liege, little deserves 
The scourge of greatness to be used on it; 
And that same greatness too which our own hands 
Have holp to make so portly. 335
Earl of Northumberland. My lord.—
Henry IV. Worcester, get thee gone; for I do see 
Danger and disobedience in thine eye: 
O, sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory, 
And majesty might never yet endure 340
The moody frontier of a servant brow. 
You have good leave to leave us: when we need 
Your use and counsel, we shall send for you. 
[Exit Worcester] 
You were about to speak. 345
[To North]
Earl of Northumberland. Yea, my good lord. 
Those prisoners in your highness' name demanded, 
Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took, 
Were, as he says, not with such strength denied 350
As is deliver'd to your majesty: 
Either envy, therefore, or misprison 
Is guilty of this fault and not my son.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). My liege, I did deny no prisoners. 
But I remember, when the fight was done, 355
When I was dry with rage and extreme toil, 
Breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword, 
Came there a certain lord, neat, and trimly dress'd, 
Fresh as a bridegroom; and his chin new reap'd 
Show'd like a stubble-land at harvest-home; 360
He was perfumed like a milliner; 
And 'twixt his finger and his thumb he held 
A pouncet-box, which ever and anon 
He gave his nose and took't away again; 
Who therewith angry, when it next came there, 365
Took it in snuff; and still he smiled and talk'd, 
And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by, 
He call'd them untaught knaves, unmannerly, 
To bring a slovenly unhandsome corse 
Betwixt the wind and his nobility. 370
With many holiday and lady terms 
He question'd me; amongst the rest, demanded 
My prisoners in your majesty's behalf. 
I then, all smarting with my wounds being cold, 
To be so pester'd with a popinjay, 375
Out of my grief and my impatience, 
Answer'd neglectingly I know not what, 
He should or he should not; for he made me mad 
To see him shine so brisk and smell so sweet 
And talk so like a waiting-gentlewoman 380
Of guns and drums and wounds,—God save the mark!— 
And telling me the sovereign'st thing on earth 
Was parmaceti for an inward bruise; 
And that it was great pity, so it was, 
This villanous salt-petre should be digg'd 385
Out of the bowels of the harmless earth, 
Which many a good tall fellow had destroy'd 
So cowardly; and but for these vile guns, 
He would himself have been a soldier. 
This bald unjointed chat of his, my lord, 390
I answer'd indirectly, as I said; 
And I beseech you, let not his report 
Come current for an accusation 
Betwixt my love and your high majesty.
Blunt. The circumstance consider'd, good my lord, 395
Whate'er Lord Harry Percy then had said 
To such a person and in such a place, 
At such a time, with all the rest retold, 
May reasonably die and never rise 
To do him wrong or any way impeach 400
What then he said, so he unsay it now.
Henry IV. Why, yet he doth deny his prisoners, 
But with proviso and exception, 
That we at our own charge shall ransom straight 
His brother-in-law, the foolish Mortimer; 405
Who, on my soul, hath wilfully betray'd 
The lives of those that he did lead to fight 
Against that great magician, damn'd Glendower, 
Whose daughter, as we hear, the Earl of March 
Hath lately married. Shall our coffers, then, 410
Be emptied to redeem a traitor home? 
Shall we but treason? and indent with fears, 
When they have lost and forfeited themselves? 
No, on the barren mountains let him starve; 
For I shall never hold that man my friend 415
Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost 
To ransom home revolted Mortimer.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Revolted Mortimer! 
He never did fall off, my sovereign liege, 
But by the chance of war; to prove that true 420
Needs no more but one tongue for all those wounds, 
Those mouthed wounds, which valiantly he took 
When on the gentle Severn's sedgy bank, 
In single opposition, hand to hand, 
He did confound the best part of an hour 425
In changing hardiment with great Glendower: 
Three times they breathed and three times did 
they drink, 
Upon agreement, of swift Severn's flood; 
Who then, affrighted with their bloody looks, 430
Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds, 
And hid his crisp head in the hollow bank, 
Bloodstained with these valiant combatants. 
Never did base and rotten policy 
Colour her working with such deadly wounds; 435
Nor could the noble Mortimer 
Receive so many, and all willingly: 
Then let not him be slander'd with revolt.
Henry IV. Thou dost belie him, Percy, thou dost belie him; 
He never did encounter with Glendower: 440
I tell thee, 
He durst as well have met the devil alone 
As Owen Glendower for an enemy. 
Art thou not ashamed? But, sirrah, henceforth 
Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer: 445
Send me your prisoners with the speediest means, 
Or you shall hear in such a kind from me 
As will displease you. My Lord Northumberland, 
We licence your departure with your son. 
Send us your prisoners, or you will hear of it. 450
[Exeunt King Henry, Blunt, and train]

Hotspur (Henry Percy). An if the devil come and roar for them, 
I will not send them: I will after straight 
And tell him so; for I will ease my heart, 
Albeit I make a hazard of my head. 455
Earl of Northumberland. What, drunk with choler? stay and pause awhile: 
Here comes your uncle.
[Re-enter WORCESTER]

Hotspur (Henry Percy). Speak of Mortimer! 
'Zounds, I will speak of him; and let my soul 460
Want mercy, if I do not join with him: 
Yea, on his part I'll empty all these veins, 
And shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust, 
But I will lift the down-trod Mortimer 
As high in the air as this unthankful king, 465
As this ingrate and canker'd Bolingbroke.
Earl of Northumberland. Brother, the king hath made your nephew mad.
Earl of Worcester. Who struck this heat up after I was gone?
Hotspur (Henry Percy). He will, forsooth, have all my prisoners; 
And when I urged the ransom once again 470
Of my wife's brother, then his cheek look'd pale, 
And on my face he turn'd an eye of death, 
Trembling even at the name of Mortimer.
Earl of Worcester. I cannot blame him: was not he proclaim'd 
By Richard that dead is the next of blood? 475
Earl of Northumberland. He was; I heard the proclamation: 
And then it was when the unhappy king, 
—Whose wrongs in us God pardon!—did set forth 
Upon his Irish expedition; 
From whence he intercepted did return 480
To be deposed and shortly murdered.
Earl of Worcester. And for whose death we in the world's wide mouth 
Live scandalized and foully spoken of.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). But soft, I pray you; did King Richard then 
Proclaim my brother Edmund Mortimer 485
Heir to the crown?
Earl of Northumberland. He did; myself did hear it.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Nay, then I cannot blame his cousin king, 
That wished him on the barren mountains starve. 
But shall it be that you, that set the crown 490
Upon the head of this forgetful man 
And for his sake wear the detested blot 
Of murderous subornation, shall it be, 
That you a world of curses undergo, 
Being the agents, or base second means, 495
The cords, the ladder, or the hangman rather? 
O, pardon me that I descend so low, 
To show the line and the predicament 
Wherein you range under this subtle king; 
Shall it for shame be spoken in these days, 500
Or fill up chronicles in time to come, 
That men of your nobility and power 
Did gage them both in an unjust behalf, 
As both of you—God pardon it!—have done, 
To put down Richard, that sweet lovely rose, 505
An plant this thorn, this canker, Bolingbroke? 
And shall it in more shame be further spoken, 
That you are fool'd, discarded and shook off 
By him for whom these shames ye underwent? 
No; yet time serves wherein you may redeem 510
Your banish'd honours and restore yourselves 
Into the good thoughts of the world again, 
Revenge the jeering and disdain'd contempt 
Of this proud king, who studies day and night 
To answer all the debt he owes to you 515
Even with the bloody payment of your deaths: 
Therefore, I say—
Earl of Worcester. Peace, cousin, say no more: 
And now I will unclasp a secret book, 
And to your quick-conceiving discontents 520
I'll read you matter deep and dangerous, 
As full of peril and adventurous spirit 
As to o'er-walk a current roaring loud 
On the unsteadfast footing of a spear.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). If he fall in, good night! or sink or swim: 525
Send danger from the east unto the west, 
So honour cross it from the north to south, 
And let them grapple: O, the blood more stirs 
To rouse a lion than to start a hare!
Earl of Northumberland. Imagination of some great exploit 530
Drives him beyond the bounds of patience.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). By heaven, methinks it were an easy leap, 
To pluck bright honour from the pale-faced moon, 
Or dive into the bottom of the deep, 
Where fathom-line could never touch the ground, 535
And pluck up drowned honour by the locks; 
So he that doth redeem her thence might wear 
Without corrival, all her dignities: 
But out upon this half-faced fellowship!
Earl of Worcester. He apprehends a world of figures here, 540
But not the form of what he should attend. 
Good cousin, give me audience for a while.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). I cry you mercy.
Earl of Worcester. Those same noble Scots 
That are your prisoners,— 545
Hotspur (Henry Percy). I'll keep them all; 
By God, he shall not have a Scot of them; 
No, if a Scot would save his soul, he shall not: 
I'll keep them, by this hand.
Earl of Worcester. You start away 550
And lend no ear unto my purposes. 
Those prisoners you shall keep.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Nay, I will; that's flat: 
He said he would not ransom Mortimer; 
Forbad my tongue to speak of Mortimer; 555
But I will find him when he lies asleep, 
And in his ear I'll holla 'Mortimer!' 
Nay, 
I'll have a starling shall be taught to speak 
Nothing but 'Mortimer,' and give it him 560
To keep his anger still in motion.
Earl of Worcester. Hear you, cousin; a word.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). All studies here I solemnly defy, 
Save how to gall and pinch this Bolingbroke: 
And that same sword-and-buckler Prince of Wales, 565
But that I think his father loves him not 
And would be glad he met with some mischance, 
I would have him poison'd with a pot of ale.
Earl of Worcester. Farewell, kinsman: I'll talk to you 
When you are better temper'd to attend. 570
Earl of Northumberland. Why, what a wasp-stung and impatient fool 
Art thou to break into this woman's mood, 
Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own!
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Why, look you, I am whipp'd and scourged with rods,
Nettled and stung with pismires, when I hear 575
Of this vile politician, Bolingbroke. 
In Richard's time,—what do you call the place?— 
A plague upon it, it is in Gloucestershire; 
'Twas where the madcap duke his uncle kept, 
His uncle York; where I first bow'd my knee 580
Unto this king of smiles, this Bolingbroke,— 
'Sblood!— 
When you and he came back from Ravenspurgh.
Earl of Northumberland. At Berkley castle.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). You say true: 585
Why, what a candy deal of courtesy 
This fawning greyhound then did proffer me! 
Look,'when his infant fortune came to age,' 
And 'gentle Harry Percy,' and 'kind cousin;' 
O, the devil take such cozeners! God forgive me! 590
Good uncle, tell your tale; I have done.
Earl of Worcester. Nay, if you have not, to it again; 
We will stay your leisure.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). I have done, i' faith.
Earl of Worcester. Then once more to your Scottish prisoners. 595
Deliver them up without their ransom straight, 
And make the Douglas' son your only mean 
For powers in Scotland; which, for divers reasons 
Which I shall send you written, be assured, 
Will easily be granted. You, my lord, 600
[To Northumberland] 
Your son in Scotland being thus employ'd, 
Shall secretly into the bosom creep 
Of that same noble prelate, well beloved, 
The archbishop. 605
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Of York, is it not?
Earl of Worcester. True; who bears hard 
His brother's death at Bristol, the Lord Scroop. 
I speak not this in estimation, 
As what I think might be, but what I know 610
Is ruminated, plotted and set down, 
And only stays but to behold the face 
Of that occasion that shall bring it on.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). I smell it: upon my life, it will do well.
Earl of Northumberland. Before the game is afoot, thou still let'st slip. 615
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Why, it cannot choose but be a noble plot; 
And then the power of Scotland and of York, 
To join with Mortimer, ha?
Earl of Worcester. And so they shall.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). In faith, it is exceedingly well aim'd. 620
Earl of Worcester. And 'tis no little reason bids us speed, 
To save our heads by raising of a head; 
For, bear ourselves as even as we can, 
The king will always think him in our debt, 
And think we think ourselves unsatisfied, 625
Till he hath found a time to pay us home: 
And see already how he doth begin 
To make us strangers to his looks of love.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). He does, he does: we'll be revenged on him.
Earl of Worcester. Cousin, farewell: no further go in this 630
Than I by letters shall direct your course. 
When time is ripe, which will be suddenly, 
I'll steal to Glendower and Lord Mortimer; 
Where you and Douglas and our powers at once, 
As I will fashion it, shall happily meet, 635
To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms, 
Which now we hold at much uncertainty.
Earl of Northumberland. Farewell, good brother: we shall thrive, I trust.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Uncle, Adieu: O, let the hours be short 
Till fields and blows and groans applaud our sport! 640
Ahy unyoked humour of your idleness: 
arrier. Heigh-ho! an it be not four by the day, I'll be 
hanged: Charles' wain is over the new chimney, and 
yet our horse not packed. What, ostler! 645
Ostler. [Within] Anon, anon.
First Carrier. I prithee, Tom, beat Cut's saddle, put a few flocks 
in the point; poor jade, is wrung in the withers out 
of all cess.
[Enter another Carrier]

Second Carrier. Peas and beans are as dank here as a dog, and that 
is the next way to give poor jades the bots: this 
house is turned upside down since Robin Ostler died.
First Carrier. Poor fellow, never joyed since the price of oats 
rose; it was the death of him. 655
Second Carrier. I think this be the most villanous house in all 
London road for fleas: I am stung like a tench.
First Carrier. Like a tench! by the mass, there is ne'er a king 
christen could be better bit than I have been since 
the first cock. 660
Second Carrier. Why, they will allow us ne'er a jordan, and then we 
leak in your chimney; and your chamber-lie breeds 
fleas like a loach.
First Carrier. What, ostler! come away and be hanged!
Second Carrier. I have a gammon of bacon and two razors of ginger, 665
to be delivered as far as Charing-cross.
First Carrier. God's body! the turkeys in my pannier are quite 
starved. What, ostler! A plague on thee! hast thou 
never an eye in thy head? canst not hear? An 
'twere not as good deed as drink, to break the pate 670
on thee, I am a very villain. Come, and be hanged! 
hast thou no faith in thee?
[Enter Gadshill]

Gadshill. Good morrow, carriers. What's o'clock?
First Carrier. I think it be two o'clock. 675
Gadshill. I pray thee lend me thy lantern, to see my gelding 
in the stable.
First Carrier. Nay, by God, soft; I know a trick worth two of that, i' faith.
Gadshill. I pray thee, lend me thine.
Second Carrier. Ay, when? can'st tell? Lend me thy lantern, quoth 680
he? marry, I'll see thee hanged first.
Gadshill. Sirrah carrier, what time do you mean to come to London?
Second Carrier. Time enough to go to bed with a candle, I warrant 
thee. Come, neighbour Mugs, we'll call up the 
gentleman: they will along with company, for they 685
have great charge.
[Exeunt carriers]

Gadshill. What, ho! chamberlain!
Chamberlain. [Within] At hand, quoth pick-purse.
Gadshill. That's even as fair as—at hand, quoth the 690
chamberlain; for thou variest no more from picking 
of purses than giving direction doth from labouring; 
thou layest the plot how.
[Enter Chamberlain]

Chamberlain. Good morrow, Master Gadshill. It holds current that 695
I told you yesternight: there's a franklin in the 
wild of Kent hath brought three hundred marks with 
him in gold: I heard him tell it to one of his 
company last night at supper; a kind of auditor; one 
that hath abundance of charge too, God knows what. 700
They are up already, and call for eggs and butter; 
they will away presently.
Gadshill. Sirrah, if they meet not with Saint Nicholas' 
clerks, I'll give thee this neck.
Chamberlain. No, I'll none of it: I pray thee keep that for the 705
hangman; for I know thou worshippest St. Nicholas 
as truly as a man of falsehood may.
Gadshill. What talkest thou to me of the hangman? if I hang, 
I'll make a fat pair of gallows; for if I hang, old 
Sir John hangs with me, and thou knowest he is no 710
starveling. Tut! there are other Trojans that thou 
dreamest not of, the which for sport sake are 
content to do the profession some grace; that would, 
if matters should be looked into, for their own 
credit sake, make all whole. I am joined with no 715
foot-land rakers, no long-staff sixpenny strikers, 
none of these mad mustachio purple-hued malt-worms; 
but with nobility and tranquillity, burgomasters and 
great oneyers, such as can hold in, such as will 
strike sooner than speak, and speak sooner than 720
drink, and drink sooner than pray: and yet, zounds, 
I lie; for they pray continually to their saint, the 
commonwealth; or rather, not pray to her, but prey 
on her, for they ride up and down on her and make 
her their boots. 725
Chamberlain. What, the commonwealth their boots? will she hold 
out water in foul way?
Gadshill. She will, she will; justice hath liquored her. We 
steal as in a castle, cocksure; we have the receipt 
of fern-seed, we walk invisible. 730
Chamberlain. Nay, by my faith, I think you are more beholding to 
the night than to fern-seed for your walking invisible.
Gadshill. Give me thy hand: thou shalt have a share in our 
purchase, as I am a true man.
Chamberlain. Nay, rather let me have it, as you are a false thief. 735
Gadshill. Go to; 'homo' is a common name to all men. Bid the 
ostler bring my gelding out of the stable. Farewell, 
you muddy knave.
[
Edward Poins. Come, shelter, shelter: I have removed Falstaff's 
horse, and he frets like a gummed velvet.
Henry V. Stand close.
[Enter FALSTAFF]

Falstaff. Poins! Poins, and be hanged! Poins! 745
Henry V. Peace, ye fat-kidneyed rascal! what a brawling dost 
thou keep!
Falstaff. Where's Poins, Hal?
Henry V. He is walked up to the top of the hill: I'll go seek him.
Falstaff. I am accursed to rob in that thief's company: the 750
rascal hath removed my horse, and tied him I know 
not where. If I travel but four foot by the squier 
further afoot, I shall break my wind. Well, I doubt 
not but to die a fair death for all this, if I 
'scape hanging for killing that rogue. I have 755
forsworn his company hourly any time this two and 
twenty years, and yet I am bewitched with the 
rogue's company. If the rascal hath not given me 
medicines to make me love him, I'll be hanged; it 
could not be else: I have drunk medicines. Poins! 760
Hal! a plague upon you both! Bardolph! Peto! 
I'll starve ere I'll rob a foot further. An 'twere 
not as good a deed as drink, to turn true man and to 
leave these rogues, I am the veriest varlet that 
ever chewed with a tooth. Eight yards of uneven 765
ground is threescore and ten miles afoot with me; 
and the stony-hearted villains know it well enough: 
a plague upon it when thieves cannot be true one to another! 
[They whistle] 
Whew! A plague upon you all! Give me my horse, you 770
rogues; give me my horse, and be hanged!
Henry V. Peace, ye fat-guts! lie down; lay thine ear close 
to the ground and list if thou canst hear the tread 
of travellers.
Falstaff. Have you any levers to lift me up again, being down? 775
'Sblood, I'll not bear mine own flesh so far afoot 
again for all the coin in thy father's exchequer. 
What a plague mean ye to colt me thus?
Henry V. Thou liest; thou art not colted, thou art uncolted.
Falstaff. I prithee, good Prince Hal, help me to my horse, 780
good king's son.
Henry V. Out, ye rogue! shall I be your ostler?
Falstaff. Go, hang thyself in thine own heir-apparent 
garters! If I be ta'en, I'll peach for this. An I 
have not ballads made on you all and sung to filthy 785
tunes, let a cup of sack be my poison: when a jest 
is so forward, and afoot too! I hate it.
[Enter Gadshill, BARDOLPH and PETO]

Gadshill. Stand.
Falstaff. So I do, against my will. 790
Edward Poins. O, 'tis our setter: I know his voice. Bardolph, 
what news? 
money of the king's coming down the hill; 'tis going 
to the king's exchequer.
Falstaff. You lie, ye rogue; 'tis going to the king's tavern.
Gadshill. There's enough to make us all.
Falstaff. To be hanged.
Henry V. Sirs, you four shall front them in the narrow lane; 
Ned Poins and I will walk lower: if they 'scape 800
from your encounter, then they light on us.
Peto. How many be there of them?
Gadshill. Some eight or ten.
Falstaff. 'Zounds, will they not rob us?
Henry V. What, a coward, Sir John Paunch? 805
Falstaff. Indeed, I am not John of Gaunt, your grandfather; 
but yet no coward, Hal.
Henry V. Well, we leave that to the proof.
Edward Poins. Sirrah Jack, thy horse stands behind the hedge: 
when thou needest him, there thou shalt find him. 810
Farewell, and stand fast.
Falstaff. Now cannot I strike him, if I should be hanged.
Henry V. Ned, where are our disguises?
Edward Poins. Here, hard by: stand close.
[Exeunt PRINCE HENRY and POINS]

Falstaff. Now, my masters, happy man be his dole, say I: 
every man to his business.
[Enter the Travellers]

First Traveller. Come, neighbour: the boy shall lead our horses down 
the hill; we'll walk afoot awhile, and ease our legs. 820
Thieves. Stand!
Travellers. Jesus bless us!
Falstaff. Strike; down with them; cut the villains' throats: 
ah! whoreson caterpillars! bacon-fed knaves! they 
hate us youth: down with them: fleece them. 825
Travellers. O, we are undone, both we and ours for ever!
Falstaff. Hang ye, gorbellied knaves, are ye undone? No, ye 
fat chuffs: I would your store were here! On, 
bacons, on! What, ye knaves! young men must live. 
You are Grand-jurors, are ye? we'll jure ye, 'faith. 830
[Here they rob them and bind them. Exeunt]

[Re-enter PRINCE HENRY and POINS]

Henry V. The thieves have bound the true men. Now could thou 
and I rob the thieves and go merrily to London, it 
would be argument for a week, laughter for a month 835
and a good jest for ever.
Edward Poins. Stand close; I hear them coming.
[Enter the Thieves again]

Falstaff. Come, my masters, let us share, and then to horse 
before day. An the Prince and Poins be not two 840
arrant cowards, there's no equity stirring: there's 
no more valour in that Poins than in a wild-duck.
Henry V. Your money!
Edward Poins. Villains! 
[As they are sharing, the Prince and Poins set upon 845
them; they all run away; and Falstaff, after a blow 
or two, runs away too, leaving the booty behind them]
Henry V. Got with much ease. Now merrily to horse: 
The thieves are all scatter'd and possess'd with fear 
So strongly that they dare not meet each other; 850
Each takes his fellow for an officer. 
Away, good Ned. Falstaff sweats to death, 
And lards the lean earth as he walks along: 
Were 't not for laughing, I should pity him.
Edward Poins. How the rogue roar'd! 855
Hotspur (Henry Percy). 'But for mine own part, my lord, I could be well 
contented to be there, in respect of the love I bear 
your house.' He could be contented: why is he not, 860
then? In respect of the love he bears our house: 
he shows in this, he loves his own barn better than 
he loves our house. Let me see some more. 'The 
purpose you undertake is dangerous;'—why, that's 
certain: 'tis dangerous to take a cold, to sleep, to 865
drink; but I tell you, my lord fool, out of this 
nettle, danger, we pluck this flower, safety. 'The 
purpose you undertake is dangerous; the friends you 
have named uncertain; the time itself unsorted; and 
your whole plot too light for the counterpoise of so 870
great an opposition.' Say you so, say you so? I say 
unto you again, you are a shallow cowardly hind, and 
you lie. What a lack-brain is this! By the Lord, 
our plot is a good plot as ever was laid; our 
friends true and constant: a good plot, good 875
friends, and full of expectation; an excellent plot, 
very good friends. What a frosty-spirited rogue is 
this! Why, my lord of York commends the plot and the 
this rascal, I could brain him with his lady's fan. 880
ieneral course of action. 'Zounds, an I were now by 
ut of that fat room, and lend me 985
thy hand to laugh a little.
Edward Poins. Where hast been, Hal?
Henry V. With three or four loggerheads amongst three or four 
score hogsheads. I have sounded the very 
base-string of humility. Sirrah, I am sworn brother 990
to a leash of drawers; and can call them all by 
their christen names, as Tom, Dick, and Francis. 
They take it already upon their salvation, that 
though I be but the prince of Wales, yet I am king 
of courtesy; and tell me flatly I am no proud Jack, 995
like Falstaff, but a Corinthian, a lad of mettle, a 
good boy, by the Lord, so they call me, and when I 
am king of England, I shall command all the good 
lads in Eastcheap. They call drinking deep, dyeing 
scarlet; and when you breathe in your watering, they 1000
cry 'hem!' and bid you play it off. To conclude, I 
am so good a proficient in one quarter of an hour, 
that I can drink with any tinker in his own language 
during my life. I tell thee, Ned, thou hast lost 
much honour, that thou wert not with me in this sweet 1005
action. But, sweet Ned,—to sweeten which name of 
Ned, I give thee this pennyworth of sugar, clapped 
even now into my hand by an under-skinker, one that 
never spake other English in his life than 'Eight 
shillings and sixpence' and 'You are welcome,' with 1010
this shrill addition, 'Anon, anon, sir! Score a pint 
of bastard in the Half-Moon,' or so. But, Ned, to 
drive away the time till Falstaff come, I prithee, 
do thou stand in some by-room, while I question my 
puny drawer to what end he gave me the sugar; and do 1015
thou never leave calling 'Francis,' that his tale 
to me may be nothing but 'Anon.' Step aside, and 
I'll show thee a precedent.
Edward Poins. Francis!
Henry V. Thou art perfect. 1020
Edward Poins. Francis!
[Exit POINS]

[Enter FRANCIS]

Francis. Anon, anon, sir. Look down into the Pomgarnet, Ralph.
Henry V. Come hither, Francis. 1025
Francis. My lord?
Henry V. How long hast thou to serve, Francis?
Francis. Forsooth, five years, and as much as to—
Edward Poins. [Within] Francis!
Francis. Anon, anon, sir. 1030
Henry V. Five year! by'r lady, a long lease for the clinking 
of pewter. But, Francis, darest thou be so valiant 
as to play the coward with thy indenture and show it 
a fair pair of heels and run from it?
Francis. O Lord, sir, I'll be sworn upon all the books in 1035
England, I could find in my heart.
Edward Poins. [Within] Francis!
Francis. Anon, sir.
Henry V. How old art thou, Francis?
Francis. Let me see—about Michaelmas next I shall be— 1040
Edward Poins. [Within] Francis!
Francis. Anon, sir. Pray stay a little, my lord.
Henry V. Nay, but hark you, Francis: for the sugar thou 
gavest me,'twas a pennyworth, wast't not?
Francis. O Lord, I would it had been two! 1045
Henry V. I will give thee for it a thousand pound: ask me 
when thou wilt, and thou shalt have it.
Edward Poins. [Within] Francis!
Francis. Anon, anon.
Henry V. Anon, Francis? No, Francis; but to-morrow, Francis; 1050
or, Francis, o' Thursday; or indeed, Francis, when 
thou wilt. But, Francis!
Francis. My lord?
Henry V. Wilt thou rob this leathern jerkin, crystal-button, 
not-pated, agate-ring, puke-stocking, caddis-garter, 1055
smooth-tongue, Spanish-pouch,—
Francis. O Lord, sir, who do you mean?
Henry V. Why, then, your brown bastard is your only drink; 
for look you, Francis, your white canvas doublet 
will sully: in Barbary, sir, it cannot come to so much. 1060
Francis. What, sir?
Edward Poins. [Within] Francis!
Henry V. Away, you rogue! dost thou not hear them call? 
[Here they both call him; the drawer stands amazed, 
not knowing which way to go] 1065
[Enter Vintner]

Vintner. What, standest thou still, and hearest such a 
calling? Look to the guests within. 
[Exit Francis] 
My lord, old Sir John, with half-a-dozen more, are 1070
at the door: shall I let them in?
Henry V. Let them alone awhile, and then open the door. 
[Exit Vintner] 
Poins!
[Re-enter POINS]

Edward Poins. Anon, anon, sir.
Henry V. Sirrah, Falstaff and the rest of the thieves are at 
the door: shall we be merry?
Edward Poins. As merry as crickets, my lad. But hark ye; what 
cunning match have you made with this jest of the 1080
drawer? come, what's the issue?
Henry V. I am now of all humours that have showed themselves 
humours since the old days of goodman Adam to the 
pupil age of this present twelve o'clock at midnight. 
[Re-enter FRANCIS] 1085
What's o'clock, Francis?
Francis. Anon, anon, sir.
[Exit]

Henry V. That ever this fellow should have fewer words than a 
parrot, and yet the son of a woman! His industry is 1090
upstairs and downstairs; his eloquence the parcel of 
a reckoning. I am not yet of Percy's mind, the 
Hotspur of the north; he that kills me some six or 
seven dozen of Scots at a breakfast, washes his 
hands, and says to his wife 'Fie upon this quiet 1095
life! I want work.' 'O my sweet Harry,' says she, 
'how many hast thou killed to-day?' 'Give my roan 
horse a drench,' says he; and answers 'Some 
fourteen,' an hour after; 'a trifle, a trifle.' I 
prithee, call in Falstaff: I'll play Percy, and 1100
that damned brawn shall play Dame Mortimer his 
wife. 'Rivo!' says the drunkard. Call in ribs, call in tallow.
[Enter FALSTAFF, Gadshill, BARDOLPH, and PETO; FRANCIS following with wine]

Edward Poins. Welcome, Jack: where hast thou been?
Falstaff. A plague of all cowards, I say, and a vengeance too! 1105
marry, and amen! Give me a cup of sack, boy. Ere I 
lead this life long, I'll sew nether stocks and mend 
them and foot them too. A plague of all cowards! 
Give me a cup of sack, rogue. Is there no virtue extant?
[He drinks]

Henry V. Didst thou never see Titan kiss a dish of butter? 
pitiful-hearted Titan, that melted at the sweet tale 
of the sun's! if thou didst, then behold that compound.
Falstaff. You rogue, here's lime in this sack too: there is 
nothing but roguery to be found in villanous man: 1115
yet a coward is worse than a cup of sack with lime 
in it. A villanous coward! Go thy ways, old Jack; 
die when thou wilt, if manhood, good manhood, be 
not forgot upon the face of the earth, then am I a 
shotten herring. There live not three good men 1120
unhanged in England; and one of them is fat and 
grows old: God help the while! a bad world, I say. 
I would I were a weaver; I could sing psalms or any 
thing. A plague of all cowards, I say still.
Henry V. How now, wool-sack! what mutter you? 1125
Falstaff. A king's son! If I do not beat thee out of thy 
kingdom with a dagger of lath, and drive all thy 
subjects afore thee like a flock of wild-geese, 
I'll never wear hair on my face more. You Prince of Wales!
Henry V. Why, you whoreson round man, what's the matter? 1130
Falstaff. Are not you a coward? answer me to that: and Poins there?
Edward Poins. 'Zounds, ye fat paunch, an ye call me coward, by the 
Lord, I'll stab thee.
Falstaff. I call thee coward! I'll see thee damned ere I call 
thee coward: but I would give a thousand pound I 1135
could run as fast as thou canst. You are straight 
enough in the shoulders, you care not who sees your 
back: call you that backing of your friends? A 
plague upon such backing! give me them that will 
face me. Give me a cup of sack: I am a rogue, if I 1140
drunk to-day.
Henry V. O villain! thy lips are scarce wiped since thou 
drunkest last.
Falstaff. All's one for that. 
[He drinks] 1145
A plague of all cowards, still say I.
Henry V. What's the matter?
Falstaff. What's the matter! there be four of us here have 
ta'en a thousand pound this day morning.
Henry V. Where is it, Jack? where is it? 1150
Falstaff. Where is it! taken from us it is: a hundred upon 
poor four of us.
Henry V. What, a hundred, man?
Falstaff. I am a rogue, if I were not at half-sword with a 
dozen of them two hours together. I have 'scaped by 1155
miracle. I am eight times thrust through the 
doublet, four through the hose; my buckler cut 
through and through; my sword hacked like a 
hand-saw—ecce signum! I never dealt better since 
I was a man: all would not do. A plague of all 1160
cowards! Let them speak: if they speak more or 
less than truth, they are villains and the sons of darkness.
Henry V. Speak, sirs; how was it?
Gadshill. We four set upon some dozen—
Falstaff. Sixteen at least, my lord. 1165
Gadshill. And bound them.
Peto. No, no, they were not bound.
Falstaff. You rogue, they were bound, every man of them; or I 
am a Jew else, an Ebrew Jew.
Gadshill. As we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon us— 1170
Falstaff. And unbound the rest, and then come in the other.
Henry V. What, fought you with them all?
Falstaff. All! I know not what you call all; but if I fought 
not with fifty of them, I am a bunch of radish: if 
there were not two or three and fifty upon poor old 1175
Jack, then am I no two-legged creature.
Henry V. Pray God you have not murdered some of them.
Falstaff. Nay, that's past praying for: I have peppered two 
of them; two I am sure I have paid, two rogues 
in buckram suits. I tell thee what, Hal, if I tell 1180
thee a lie, spit in my face, call me horse. Thou 
knowest my old ward; here I lay and thus I bore my 
point. Four rogues in buckram let drive at me—
Henry V. What, four? thou saidst but two even now.
Falstaff. Four, Hal; I told thee four. 1185
Edward Poins. Ay, ay, he said four.
Falstaff. These four came all a-front, and mainly thrust at 
me. I made me no more ado but took all their seven 
points in my target, thus.
Henry V. Seven? why, there were but four even now. 1190
Falstaff. In buckram?
Edward Poins. Ay, four, in buckram suits.
Falstaff. Seven, by these hilts, or I am a villain else.
Henry V. Prithee, let him alone; we shall have more anon.
Falstaff. Dost thou hear me, Hal? 1195
Henry V. Ay, and mark thee too, Jack.
Falstaff. Do so, for it is worth the listening to. These nine 
in buckram that I told thee of—
Henry V. So, two more already.
Falstaff. Their points being broken,— 1200
Edward Poins. Down fell their hose.
Falstaff. Began to give me ground: but I followed me close, 
came in foot and hand; and with a thought seven of 
the eleven I paid.
Henry V. O monstrous! eleven buckram men grown out of two! 1205
Falstaff. But, as the devil would have it, three misbegotten 
knaves in Kendal green came at my back and let drive 
at me; for it was so dark, Hal, that thou couldst 
not see thy hand.
Henry V. These lies are like their father that begets them; 1210
gross as a mountain, open, palpable. Why, thou 
clay-brained guts, thou knotty-pated fool, thou 
whoreson, obscene, grease tallow-catch,—
Falstaff. What, art thou mad? art thou mad? is not the truth 
the truth? 1215
Henry V. Why, how couldst thou know these men in Kendal 
green, when it was so dark thou couldst not see thy 
hand? come, tell us your reason: what sayest thou to this?
Edward Poins. Come, your reason, Jack, your reason.
Falstaff. What, upon compulsion? 'Zounds, an I were at the 1220
strappado, or all the racks in the world, I would 
not tell you on compulsion. Give you a reason on 
compulsion! If reasons were as plentiful as 
blackberries, I would give no man a reason upon 
compulsion, I. 1225
Henry V. I'll be no longer guilty of this sin; this sanguine 
coward, this bed-presser, this horseback-breaker, 
this huge hill of flesh,—
Falstaff. 'Sblood, you starveling, you elf-skin, you dried 
neat's tongue, you bull's pizzle, you stock-fish! O 1230
for breath to utter what is like thee! you 
tailor's-yard, you sheath, you bowcase; you vile 
standing-tuck,—
Henry V. Well, breathe awhile, and then to it again: and 
when thou hast tired thyself in base comparisons, 1235
hear me speak but this.
Edward Poins. Mark, Jack.
Henry V. We two saw you four set on four and bound them, and 
were masters of their wealth. Mark now, how a plain 
tale shall put you down. Then did we two set on you 1240
four; and, with a word, out-faced you from your 
prize, and have it; yea, and can show it you here in 
the house: and, Falstaff, you carried your guts 
away as nimbly, with as quick dexterity, and roared 
for mercy and still run and roared, as ever I heard 1245
bull-calf. What a slave art thou, to hack thy sword 
as thou hast done, and then say it was in fight! 
What trick, what device, what starting-hole, canst 
thou now find out to hide thee from this open and 
apparent shame? 1250
Edward Poins. Come, let's hear, Jack; what trick hast thou now?
Falstaff. By the Lord, I knew ye as well as he that made ye. 
Why, hear you, my masters: was it for me to kill the 
heir-apparent? should I turn upon the true prince? 
why, thou knowest I am as valiant as Hercules: but 1255
beware instinct; the lion will not touch the true 
prince. Instinct is a great matter; I was now a 
coward on instinct. I shall think the better of 
myself and thee during my life; I for a valiant 
lion, and thou for a true prince. But, by the Lord, 1260
lads, I am glad you have the money. Hostess, clap 
to the doors: watch to-night, pray to-morrow. 
Gallants, lads, boys, hearts of gold, all the titles 
of good fellowship come to you! What, shall we be 
merry? shall we have a play extempore? 1265
Henry V. Content; and the argument shall be thy running away.
Falstaff. Ah, no more of that, Hal, an thou lovest me!
[Enter Hostess]

Hostess Quickly. O Jesu, my lord the prince!
Henry V. How now, my lady the hostess! what sayest thou to 1270
me?
Hostess Quickly. Marry, my lord, there is a nobleman of the court at 
door would speak with you: he says he comes from 
your father.
Henry V. Give him as much as will make him a royal man, and 1275
send him back again to my mother.
Falstaff. What manner of man is he?
Hostess Quickly. An old man.
Falstaff. What doth gravity out of his bed at midnight? Shall 
I give him his answer? 1280
Henry V. Prithee, do, Jack.
Falstaff. 'Faith, and I'll send him packing.
[Exit FALSTAFF]

Henry V. Now, sirs: by'r lady, you fought fair; so did you, 
Peto; so did you, Bardolph: you are lions too, you 1285
ran away upon instinct, you will not touch the true 
prince; no, fie!
Lord Bardolph. 'Faith, I ran when I saw others run.
Henry V. 'Faith, tell me now in earnest, how came Falstaff's 
sword so hacked? 1290
Peto. Why, he hacked it with his dagger, and said he would 
swear truth out of England but he would make you 
believe it was done in fight, and persuaded us to do the like.
Lord Bardolph. Yea, and to tickle our noses with spear-grass to 
make them bleed, and then to beslubber our garments 1295
with it and swear it was the blood of true men. I 
did that I did not this seven year before, I blushed 
to hear his monstrous devices.
Henry V. O villain, thou stolest a cup of sack eighteen years 
ago, and wert taken with the manner, and ever since 1300
thou hast blushed extempore. Thou hadst fire and 
sword on thy side, and yet thou rannest away: what 
instinct hadst thou for it?
Lord Bardolph. My lord, do you see these meteors? do you behold 
these exhalations? 1305
Henry V. I do.
Lord Bardolph. What think you they portend?
Henry V. Hot livers and cold purses.
Lord Bardolph. Choler, my lord, if rightly taken.
Henry V. No, if rightly taken, halter. 1310
[Re-enter FALSTAFF] 
Here comes lean Jack, here comes bare-bone. 
How now, my sweet creature of bombast! 
How long is't ago, Jack, since thou sawest thine own knee?
Falstaff. My own knee! when I was about thy years, Hal, I was 1315
not an eagle's talon in the waist; I could have 
crept into any alderman's thumb-ring: a plague of 
sighing and grief! it blows a man up like a 
bladder. There's villanous news abroad: here was 
Sir John Bracy from your father; you must to the 1320
court in the morning. That same mad fellow of the 
north, Percy, and he of Wales, that gave Amamon the 
bastinado and made Lucifer cuckold and swore the 
devil his true liegeman upon the cross of a Welsh 
hook—what a plague call you him? 1325
Edward Poins. O, Glendower.
Falstaff. Owen, Owen, the same; and his son-in-law Mortimer, 
and old Northumberland, and that sprightly Scot of 
Scots, Douglas, that runs o' horseback up a hill 
perpendicular,— 1330
Henry V. He that rides at high speed and with his pistol 
kills a sparrow flying.
Falstaff. You have hit it.
Henry V. So did he never the sparrow.
Falstaff. Well, that rascal hath good mettle in him; he will not run. 1335
Henry V. Why, what a rascal art thou then, to praise him so 
for running!
Falstaff. O' horseback, ye cuckoo; but afoot he will not budge a foot.
Henry V. Yes, Jack, upon instinct.
Falstaff. I grant ye, upon instinct. Well, he is there too, 1340
and one Mordake, and a thousand blue-caps more: 
Worcester is stolen away to-night; thy father's 
beard is turned white with the news: you may buy 
land now as cheap as stinking mackerel.
Henry V. Why, then, it is like, if there come a hot June and 1345
this civil buffeting hold, we shall buy maidenheads 
as they buy hob-nails, by the hundreds.
Falstaff. By the mass, lad, thou sayest true; it is like we 
shall have good trading that way. But tell me, Hal, 
art not thou horrible afeard? thou being 1350
heir-apparent, could the world pick thee out three 
such enemies again as that fiend Douglas, that 
spirit Percy, and that devil Glendower? Art thou 
not horribly afraid? doth not thy blood thrill at 
it? 1355
Henry V. Not a whit, i' faith; I lack some of thy instinct.
Falstaff. Well, thou wert be horribly chid tomorrow when thou 
comest to thy father: if thou love me, practise an answer.
Henry V. Do thou stand for my father, and examine me upon the 
particulars of my life. 1360
Falstaff. Shall I? content: this chair shall be my state, 
this dagger my sceptre, and this cushion my crown.
Henry V. Thy state is taken for a joined-stool, thy golden 
sceptre for a leaden dagger, and thy precious rich 
crown for a pitiful bald crown! 1365
Falstaff. Well, an the fire of grace be not quite out of thee, 
now shalt thou be moved. Give me a cup of sack to 
make my eyes look red, that it may be thought I have 
wept; for I must speak in passion, and I will do it 
in King Cambyses' vein. 1370
Henry V. Well, here is my leg.
Falstaff. And here is my speech. Stand aside, nobility.
Hostess Quickly. O Jesu, this is excellent sport, i' faith!
Falstaff. Weep not, sweet queen; for trickling tears are vain.
Hostess Quickly. O, the father, how he holds his countenance! 1375
Falstaff. For God's sake, lords, convey my tristful queen; 
For tears do stop the flood-gates of her eyes.
Hostess Quickly. O Jesu, he doth it as like one of these harlotry 
players as ever I see!
Falstaff. Peace, good pint-pot; peace, good tickle-brain. 1380
Harry, I do not only marvel where thou spendest thy 
time, but also how thou art accompanied: for though 
the camomile, the more it is trodden on the faster 
it grows, yet youth, the more it is wasted the 
sooner it wears. That thou art my son, I have 1385
partly thy mother's word, partly my own opinion, 
but chiefly a villanous trick of thine eye and a 
foolish-hanging of thy nether lip, that doth warrant 
me. If then thou be son to me, here lies the point; 
why, being son to me, art thou so pointed at? Shall 1390
the blessed sun of heaven prove a micher and eat 
blackberries? a question not to be asked. Shall 
the sun of England prove a thief and take purses? a 
question to be asked. There is a thing, Harry, 
which thou hast often heard of and it is known to 1395
many in our land by the name of pitch: this pitch, 
as ancient writers do report, doth defile; so doth 
the company thou keepest: for, Harry, now I do not 
speak to thee in drink but in tears, not in 
pleasure but in passion, not in words only, but in 1400
woes also: and yet there is a virtuous man whom I 
have often noted in thy company, but I know not his name.
Henry V. What manner of man, an it like your majesty?
Falstaff. A goodly portly man, i' faith, and a corpulent; of a 
cheerful look, a pleasing eye and a most noble 1405
carriage; and, as I think, his age some fifty, or, 
by'r lady, inclining to three score; and now I 
remember me, his name is Falstaff: if that man 
should be lewdly given, he deceiveth me; for, Harry, 
I see virtue in his looks. If then the tree may be 1410
known by the fruit, as the fruit by the tree, then, 
peremptorily I speak it, there is virtue in that 
Falstaff: him keep with, the rest banish. And tell 
me now, thou naughty varlet, tell me, where hast 
thou been this month? 1415
Henry V. Dost thou speak like a king? Do thou stand for me, 
and I'll play my father.
Falstaff. Depose me? if thou dost it half so gravely, so 
majestically, both in word and matter, hang me up by 
the heels for a rabbit-sucker or a poulter's hare. 1420
Henry V. Well, here I am set.
Falstaff. And here I stand: judge, my masters.
Henry V. Now, Harry, whence come you?
Falstaff. My noble lord, from Eastcheap.
Henry V. The complaints I hear of thee are grievous. 1425
Falstaff. 'Sblood, my lord, they are false: nay, I'll tickle 
ye for a young prince, i' faith.
Henry V. Swearest thou, ungracious boy? henceforth ne'er look 
on me. Thou art violently carried away from grace: 
there is a devil haunts thee in the likeness of an 1430
old fat man; a tun of man is thy companion. Why 
dost thou converse with that trunk of humours, that 
bolting-hutch of beastliness, that swollen parcel 
of dropsies, that huge bombard of sack, that stuffed 
cloak-bag of guts, that roasted Manningtree ox with 1435
the pudding in his belly, that reverend vice, that 
grey iniquity, that father ruffian, that vanity in 
years? Wherein is he good, but to taste sack and 
drink it? wherein neat and cleanly, but to carve a 
capon and eat it? wherein cunning, but in craft? 1440
wherein crafty, but in villany? wherein villanous, 
but in all things? wherein worthy, but in nothing?
Falstaff. I would your grace would take me with you: whom 
means your grace?
Henry V. That villanous abominable misleader of youth, 1445
Falstaff, that old white-bearded Satan.
Falstaff. My lord, the man I know.
Henry V. I know thou dost.
Falstaff. But to say I know more harm in him than in myself, 
were to say more than I know. That he is old, the 1450
more the pity, his white hairs do witness it; but 
that he is, saving your reverence, a whoremaster, 
that I utterly deny. If sack and sugar be a fault, 
God help the wicked! if to be old and merry be a 
sin, then many an old host that I know is damned: if 1455
to be fat be to be hated, then Pharaoh's lean kine 
are to be loved. No, my good lord; banish Peto, 
banish Bardolph, banish Poins: but for sweet Jack 
Falstaff, kind Jack Falstaff, true Jack Falstaff, 
valiant Jack Falstaff, and therefore more valiant, 1460
being, as he is, old Jack Falstaff, banish not him 
thy Harry's company, banish not him thy Harry's 
company: banish plump Jack, and banish all the world.
Henry V. I do, I will.
[A knocking heard]

[Exeunt Hostess, FRANCIS, and BARDOLPH]

[Re-enter BARDOLPH, running]

Lord Bardolph. O, my lord, my lord! the sheriff with a most 
monstrous watch is at the door.
Falstaff. Out, ye rogue! Play out the play: I have much to 1470
say in the behalf of that Falstaff.
[Re-enter the Hostess]

Hostess Quickly. O Jesu, my lord, my lord!
Henry V. Heigh, heigh! the devil rides upon a fiddlestick: 
what's the matter? 1475
Hostess Quickly. The sheriff and all the watch are at the door: they 
are come to search the house. Shall I let them in?
Falstaff. Dost thou hear, Hal? never call a true piece of 
gold a counterfeit: thou art essentially mad, 
without seeming so. 1480
Henry V. And thou a natural coward, without instinct.
Falstaff. I deny your major: if you will deny the sheriff, 
so; if not, let him enter: if I become not a cart 
as well as another man, a plague on my bringing up! 
I hope I shall as soon be strangled with a halter as another. 1485
Henry V. Go, hide thee behind the arras: the rest walk up 
above. Now, my masters, for a true face and good 
conscience.
Falstaff. Both which I have had: but their date is out, and 
therefore I'll hide me. 1490
Henry V. Call in the sheriff. 
[Exeunt all except PRINCE HENRY and PETO] 
[Enter Sheriff and the Carrier] 
Now, master sheriff, what is your will with me?
Sheriff. First, pardon me, my lord. A hue and cry 1495
Hath follow'd certain men unto this house.
Henry V. What men?
Sheriff. One of them is well known, my gracious lord, 
A gross fat man.
Carrier. As fat as butter. 1500
Henry V. The man, I do assure you, is not here; 
For I myself at this time have employ'd him. 
And, sheriff, I will engage my word to thee 
That I will, by to-morrow dinner-time, 
Send him to answer thee, or any man, 1505
For any thing he shall be charged withal: 
And so let me entreat you leave the house.
Sheriff. I will, my lord. There are two gentlemen 
Have in this robbery lost three hundred marks.
Henry V. It may be so: if he have robb'd these men, 1510
He shall be answerable; and so farewell.
Sheriff. Good night, my noble lord.
Henry V. I think it is good morrow, is it not?
Sheriff. Indeed, my lord, I think it be two o'clock.
[Exeunt Sheriff and Carrier]

Henry V. This oily rascal is known as well as Paul's. Go, 
call him forth.
Peto. Falstaff!—Fast asleep behind the arras, and 
snorting like a horse.
Henry V. Hark, how hard he fetches breath. Search his pockets. 1520
[He searcheth his pockets, and findeth certain papers] 
What hast thou found?
Peto. Nothing but papers, my lord.
Henry V. Let's see what they be: read them.
Peto. [Reads] Item, A capon,. . 2s. 2d. 1525
Item, Sauce,. . . 4d. 
Item, Sack, two gallons, 5s. 8d. 
Item, Anchovies and sack after supper, 2s. 6d. 
Item, Bread, ob.
Henry V. O monstrous! but one half-penny-worth of bread to 1530
this intolerable deal of sack! What there is else, 
keep close; we'll read it at more advantage: there 
let him sleep till day. I'll to the court in the 
morning. We must all to the wars, and thy place 
shall be honourable. I'll procure this fat rogue a 1535
charge of foot; and I know his death will be a 
march of twelve-score. The money shall be paid 
back again with advantage. Be with me betimes in 
the morning; and so, good morrow, Peto.
[Exeunt]

Peto. Good morrow, good my lord.
Is there not my father, my uncle and myself? lord 
Edmund Mortimer, My lord of York and Owen Glendower? 
is there not besides the Douglas? have I not all 
their letters to meet me in arms by the ninth of the 
next month? and are they not some of them set 885
forward already? What a pagan rascal is this! an 
infidel! Ha! you shall see now in very sincerity 
of fear and cold heart, will he to the king and lay 
open all our proceedings. O, I could divide myself 
and go to buffets, for moving such a dish of 890
skim milk with so honourable an action! Hang him! 
let him tell the king: we are prepared. I will set 
forward to-night. 
[Enter LADY PERCY] 
How now, Kate! I must leave you within these two hours. 895
Lady Percy. O, my good lord, why are you thus alone? 
For what offence have I this fortnight been 
A banish'd woman from my Harry's bed? 
Tell me, sweet lord, what is't that takes from thee 
Thy stomach, pleasure and thy golden sleep? 900
Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth, 
And start so often when thou sit'st alone? 
Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks; 
And given my treasures and my rights of thee 
To thick-eyed musing and cursed melancholy? 905
In thy faint slumbers I by thee have watch'd, 
And heard thee murmur tales of iron wars; 
Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed; 
Cry 'Courage! to the field!' And thou hast talk'd 
Of sallies and retires, of trenches, tents, 910
Of palisadoes, frontiers, parapets, 
Of basilisks, of cannon, culverin, 
Of prisoners' ransom and of soldiers slain, 
And all the currents of a heady fight. 
Thy spirit within thee hath been so at war 915
And thus hath so bestirr'd thee in thy sleep, 
That beads of sweat have stood upon thy brow 
Like bubbles in a late-disturbed stream; 
And in thy face strange motions have appear'd, 
Such as we see when men restrain their breath 920
On some great sudden hest. O, what portents are these? 
Some heavy business hath my lord in hand, 
And I must know it, else he loves me not.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). What, ho! 
[Enter Servant] 925
Is Gilliams with the packet gone?
Servant. He is, my lord, an hour ago.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Hath Butler brought those horses from the sheriff?
Servant. One horse, my lord, he brought even now.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). What horse? a roan, a crop-ear, is it not? 930
Servant. It is, my lord.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). That roan shall by my throne. 
Well, I will back him straight: O esperance! 
Bid Butler lead him forth into the park.
[Exit Servant]

Lady Percy. But hear you, my lord.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). What say'st thou, my lady?
Lady Percy. What is it carries you away?
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Why, my horse, my love, my horse.
Lady Percy. Out, you mad-headed ape! 940
A weasel hath not such a deal of spleen 
As you are toss'd with. In faith, 
I'll know your business, Harry, that I will. 
I fear my brother Mortimer doth stir 
About his title, and hath sent for you 945
To line his enterprise: but if you go,—
Hotspur (Henry Percy). So far afoot, I shall be weary, love.
Lady Percy. Come, come, you paraquito, answer me 
Directly unto this question that I ask: 
In faith, I'll break thy little finger, Harry, 950
An if thou wilt not tell me all things true.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Away, 
Away, you trifler! Love! I love thee not, 
I care not for thee, Kate: this is no world 
To play with mammets and to tilt with lips: 955
We must have bloody noses and crack'd crowns, 
And pass them current too. God's me, my horse! 
What say'st thou, Kate? what would'st thou 
have with me?
Lady Percy. Do you not love me? do you not, indeed? 960
Well, do not then; for since you love me not, 
I will not love myself. Do you not love me? 
Nay, tell me if you speak in jest or no.
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Come, wilt thou see me ride? 
And when I am on horseback, I will swear 965
I love thee infinitely. But hark you, Kate; 
I must not have you henceforth question me 
Whither I go, nor reason whereabout: 
Whither I must, I must; and, to conclude, 
This evening must I leave you, gentle Kate. 970
I know you wise, but yet no farther wise 
Than Harry Percy's wife: constant you are, 
But yet a woman: and for secrecy, 
No lady closer; for I well believe 
Thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know; 975
And so far will I trust thee, gentle Kate.
Lady Percy. How! so far?
Hotspur (Henry Percy). Not an inch further. But hark you, Kate: 
Whither I go, thither shall you go too; 
To-day will I set forth, to-morrow you. 980
Will this content you, Kate?
Lady Percy. It must of force.
[Exeunt]

Yet herein will I imitate the sun, 300
Who doth permit the base contagious clouds 
To smother up his beauty from the world, 
That, when he please again to be himself, 
Being wanted, he may be more wonder'd at, 
By breaking through the foul and ugly mists 305
Of vapours that did seem to strangle him. 
If all the year were playing holidays, 
To sport would be as tedious as to work; 
But when they seldom come, they wish'd for come, 
And nothing pleaseth but rare accidents. 310
So, when this loose behavior I throw off 
And pay the debt I never promised, 
By how much better than my word I am, 
By so much shall I falsify men's hopes; 
And like bright metal on a sullen ground, 315
My reformation, glittering o'er my fault, 
Shall show more goodly and attract more eyes 
Than that which hath no foil to set it off. 
I'll so offend, to make offence a skill; 
Redeeming time when men think least I will. 320

